]


1





Kublai Khan does not necessarily believe everything Marco Polo says when he describes the cities visited on his expeditions, but the emperor of the Tartars does continue listening to the young Venetian with greater attention and curiosity than he shows any other messenger or explorer of his. In the lives of emperors there is a moment which follows pride in the boundless extension of the territories we have conquered, and the melancholy and relief of knowing we shall soon give up any thought of knowing and understanding them. There is a sense of emptiness that comes over us at evening, with the odor of the elephants after the rain and the sandalwood ashes growing cold in the braziers, a dizziness that makes rivers and mountains tremble on the fallow curves of the planispheres where they are portrayed, and rolls up, one after the other, the despatches announcing to us the collapse of the last enemy troops, from defeat to defeat, and flakes the wax of the seals of obscure kings who beseech our armies’ protection, offering in exchange annual tributes of precious metals, tanned hides, and tortoise shell. It is the desperate moment when we discover that this empire, which had seemed to us the sum of all wonders, is an endless, formless ruin, that corruption’s gangrene has spread too far to be healed by our scepter, that the triumph over enemy sovereigns has made us the heirs of their long undoing. Only in Marco Polo’s accounts was Kublai Khan able to discern, through the walls and towers destined to crumble, the tracery of a pattern so subtle it could escape the termites’ gnawing.





CITIES & MEMORY • 1

LEAVING THERE AND proceeding for three days toward the east, you reach Diomira, a city with sixty silver domes, bronze statues of all the gods, streets paved with lead, a crystal theater, a golden cock that crows each morning on a tower. All these beauties will already be familiar to the visitor, who has seen them also in other cities. But the special quality of this city for the man who arrives there on a September evening, when the days are growing shorter and the multicolored lamps are lighted all at once at the doors of the food stalls and from a terrace a woman’s voice cries ooh!, is that he feels envy toward those who now believe they have once before lived an evening identical to this and who think they were happy, that time.





CITIES & MEMORY • 2

WHEN A MAN rides a long time through wild regions he feels the desire for a city. Finally he comes to Isidora, a city where the buildings have spiral staircases encrusted with spiral seashells, where perfect telescopes and violins are made, where the foreigner hesitating between two women always encounters a third, where cockfights degenerate into bloody brawls among the bettors. He was thinking of all these things when he desired a city. Isidora, therefore, is the city of his dreams: with one difference. The dreamed-of city contained him as a young man; he arrives at Isidora in his old age. In the square there is the wall where the old men sit and watch the young go by; he is seated in a row with them. Desires are already memories.





CITIES & DESIRE • 1

THERE ARE TWO ways of describing the city of Dorothea: you can say that four aluminum towers rise from its walls flanking seven gates with spring-operated drawbridges that span the moat whose water feeds four green canals which cross the city, dividing it into nine quarters, each with three hundred houses and seven hundred chimneys. And bearing in mind that the nubile girls of each quarter marry youths of other quarters and their parents exchange the goods that each family holds in monopoly – bergamot, sturgeon roe, astrolabes, amethysts – you can then work from these facts until you learn everything you wish about the city in the past, present, and future. Or else you can say, like the camel driver who took me there: “I arrived here in my first youth, one morning, many people were hurrying along the streets toward the market, the women had fine teeth and looked you straight in the eye, three soldiers on a platform played the trumpet, and all around wheels turned and colored banners fluttered in the wind. Before then I had known only the desert and the caravan routes. In the years that followed, my eyes returned to contemplate the desert expanses and the caravan routes; but now I know this path is only one of the many that opened before me on that morning in Dorothea.”





CITIES & MEMORY • 3

IN VAIN, GREAT-hearted Kublai, shall I attempt to describe Zaira, city of high bastions. I could tell you how many steps make up the streets rising like stairways, and the degree of the arcades’ curves, and what kind of zinc scales cover the roofs; but I already know this would be the same as telling you nothing. The city does not consist of this, but of relationships between the measurements of its space and the events of its past: the height of a lamppost and the distance from the ground of a hanged usurper’s swaying feet; the line strung from the lamppost to the railing opposite and the festoons that decorate the course of the queen’s nuptial procession; the height of that railing and the leap of the adulterer who climbed over it at dawn; the tilt of a guttering and a cat’s progress along it as he slips into the same window; the firing range of a gunboat which has suddenly appeared beyond the cape and the bomb that destroys the guttering; the rips in the fish net and the three old men seated on the dock mending nets and telling each other for the hundredth time the story of the gunboat of the usurper, who some say was the queen’s illegitimate son, abandoned in his swaddling clothes there on the dock.

As this wave from memories flows in, the city soaks it up like a sponge and expands. A description of Zaira as it is today should contain all Zaira’s past. The city, however, does not tell its past, but contains it like the lines of a hand, written in the corners of the streets, the gratings of the windows, the banisters of the steps, the antennae of the lightning rods, the poles of the flags, every segment marked in turn with scratches, indentations, scrolls.





CITIES & DESIRE • 2

AT THE END of three days, moving southward, you come upon Anastasia, a city with concentric canals watering it and kites flying over it. I should now list the wares that can profitably be bought here: agate, onyx, chrysoprase, and other varieties of chalcedony; I should praise the flesh of the golden pheasant cooked here over fires of seasoned cherry wood and sprinkled with much sweet marjoram; and tell of the women I have seen bathing in the pool of a garden and who sometimes – it is said – invite the stranger to disrobe with them and chase them in the water. But with all this, I would not be telling you the city’s true essence; for while the description of Anastasia awakens desires one at a time only to force you to stifle them, when you are in the heart of Anastasia one morning your desires waken all at once and surround you. The city appears to you as a whole where no desire is lost and of which you are a part, and since it enjoys everything you do not enjoy, you can do nothing but inhabit this desire and be content. Such is the power, sometimes called malignant, sometimes benign, that Anastasia, the treacherous city, possesses; if for eight hours a day you work as a cutter of agate, onyx, chrysoprase, your labor which gives form to desire takes from desire its form, and you believe you are enjoying Anastasia wholly when you are only its slave.





CITIES & SIGNS • 1

YOU WALK FOR days among trees and among stones. Rarely does the eye light on a thing, and then only when it has recognized that thing as the sign of another thing: a print in the sand indicates the tiger’s passage; a marsh announces a vein of water; the hibiscus flower, the end of winter. All the rest is silent and interchangeable; trees and stones are only what they are.

Finally the journey leads to the city of Tamara. You penetrate it along streets thick with signboards jutting from the walls. The eye does not see things but images of things that mean other things: pincers point out the tooth-drawer’s house; a tankard, the tavern; halberds, the barracks; scales, the grocer’s. Statues and shields depict lions, dolphins, towers, stars: a sign that something – who knows what? – has as its sign a lion or a dolphin or a tower or a star. Other signals warn of what is forbidden in a given place (to enter the alley with wagons, to urinate behind the kiosk, to fish with your pole from the bridge) and what is allowed (watering zebras, playing bowls, burning relatives’ corpses). From the doors of the temples the gods’ statues are seen, each portrayed with his attributes – the cornucopia, the hourglass, the medusa – so that the worshiper can recognize them and address his prayers correctly. If a building has no signboard or figure, its very form and the position it occupies in the city’s order suffice to indicate its function: the palace, the prison, the mint, the Pythagorean school, the brothel. The wares, too, which the vendors display on their stalls are valuable not in themselves but as signs of other things: the embroidered headband stands for elegance; the gilded palanquin, power; the volumes of Averroes, learning; the ankle bracelet, voluptuousness. Your gaze scans the streets as if they were written pages: the city says everything you must think, makes you repeat her discourse, and while you believe you are visiting Tamara you are only recording the names with which she defines herself and all her parts.

However the city may really be, beneath this thick coating of signs, whatever it may contain or conceal, you leave Tamara without having discovered it. Outside, the land stretches, empty, to the horizon; the sky opens, with speeding clouds. In the shape that chance and wind give the clouds, you are already intent on recognizing figures: a sailing ship, a hand, an elephant. . . .





CITIES & MEMORY • 4

BEYOND SIX RIVERS and three mountain ranges rises Zora, a city that no one, having seen it, can forget. But not because, like other memorable cities, it leaves an unusual image in your recollections. Zora has the quality of remaining in your memory point by point, in its succession of streets, of houses along the streets, and of doors and windows in the houses, though nothing in them possesses a special beauty or rarity. Zora’s secret lies in the way your gaze runs over patterns following one another as in a musical score where not a note can be altered or displaced. The man who knows by heart how Zora is made, if he is unable to sleep at night, can imagine he is walking along the streets and he remembers the order by which the copper clock follows the barber’s striped awning, then the fountain with the nine jets, the astronomer’s glass tower, the melon vendor’s kiosk, the statue of the hermit and the lion, the Turkish bath, the café at the corner, the alley that leads to the harbor. This city which cannot be expunged from the mind is like an armature, a honeycomb in whose cells each of us can place the things he wants to remember: names of famous men, virtues, numbers, vegetable and mineral classifications, dates of battles, constellations, parts of speech. Between each idea and each point of the itinerary an affinity or a contrast can be established, serving as an immediate aid to memory. So the world’s most learned men are those who have memorized Zora.

But in vain I set out to visit the city: forced to remain motionless and always the same, in order to be more easily remembered, Zora has languished, disintegrated, disappeared. The earth has forgotten her.





CITIES & DESIRE • 3

DESPINA CAN BE reached in two ways: by ship or by camel. The city displays one face to the traveler arriving overland and a different one to him who arrives by sea.

When the camel driver sees, at the horizon of the tableland, the pinnacles of the skyscrapers come into view, the radar antennae, the white and red wind-socks flapping, the chimneys belching smoke, he thinks of a ship; he knows it is a city, but he thinks of it as a vessel that will take him away from the desert, a windjammer about to cast off, with the breeze already swelling the sails, not yet unfurled, or a steamboat with its boiler vibrating in the iron keel; and he thinks of all the ports, the foreign merchandise the cranes unload on the docks, the taverns where crews of different flags break bottles over one another’s heads, the lighted, ground-floor windows, each with a woman combing her hair.

In the coastline’s haze, the sailor discerns the form of a camel’s withers, an embroidered saddle with glittering fringe between two spotted humps, advancing and swaying; he knows it is a city, but he thinks of it as a camel from whose pack hang wineskins and bags of candied fruit, date wine, tobacco leaves, and already he sees himself at the head of a long caravan taking him away from the desert of the sea, toward oases of fresh water in the palm trees’ jagged shade, toward palaces of thick, whitewashed walls, tiled courts where girls are dancing barefoot, moving their arms, half-hidden by their veils, and half-revealed.

Each city receives its form from the desert it opposes; and so the camel driver and the sailor see Despina, a border city between two deserts.





CITIES & SIGNS • 2

TRAVELERS RETURN FROM the city of Zirma with distinct memories: a blind black man shouting in the crowd, a lunatic teetering on a skyscraper’s cornice, a girl walking with a puma on a leash. Actually many of the blind men who tap their canes on Zirma’s cobblestones are black; in every skyscraper there is someone going mad; all lunatics spend hours on cornices; there is no puma that some girl does not raise, as a whim. The city is redundant: it repeats itself so that something will stick in the mind.

I too am returning from Zirma: my memory includes dirigibles flying in all directions, at window level; streets of shops where tattoos are drawn on sailors’ skin; underground trains crammed with obese women suffering from the humidity. My traveling companions, on the other hand, swear they saw only one dirigible hovering among the city’s spires, only one tattoo artist arranging needles and inks and pierced patterns on his bench, only one fat woman fanning herself on a train’s platform. Memory is redundant: it repeats signs so that the city can begin to exist.





THIN CITIES • 1

ISAURA, CITY OF the thousand wells, is said to rise over a deep, subterranean lake. On all sides, wherever the inhabitants dig long vertical holes in the ground, they succeed in drawing up water, as far as the city extends, and no farther. Its green border repeats the dark outline of the buried lake; an invisible landscape conditions the visible one; everything that moves in the sunlight is driven by the lapping wave enclosed beneath the rock’s calcareous sky.

Consequently two forms of religion exist in Isaura.

The city’s gods, according to some people, live in the depths, in the black lake that feeds the underground streams. According to others, the gods live in the buckets that rise, suspended from a cable, as they appear over the edge of the wells, in the revolving pulleys, in the windlasses of the norias, in the pump handles, in the blades of the windmills that draw the water up from the drillings, in the trestles that support the twisting probes, in the reservoirs perched on stilts over the roofs, in the slender arches of the aqueducts, in all the columns of water, the vertical pipes, the plungers, the drains, all the way up to the weathercocks that surmount the airy scaffoldings of Isaura, a city that moves entirely upward.





Sent off to inspect the remote provinces, the Great Khan’s envoys and tax-collectors duly returned to Kai-ping-fu and to the gardens of magnolias in whose shade Kublai strolled, listening to their long reports. The ambassadors were Persians, Armenians, Syrians, Copts, Turkomans; the emperor is he who is a foreigner to each of his subjects, and only through foreign eyes and ears could the empire manifest its existence to Kublai. In languages incomprehensible to the Khan, the envoys related information heard in languages incomprehensible to them: from this opaque, dense stridor emerged the revenues received by the imperial treasury, the first and last names of officials dismissed and decapitated, the dimensions of the canals that the narrow rivers fed in times of drought. But when the young Venetian made his report, a different communication was established between him and the emperor. Newly arrived and totally ignorant of the Levantine languages, Marco Polo could express himself only with gestures, leaps, cries of wonder and of horror, animal barkings or hootings, or with objects he took from his knapsacks – ostrich plumes, pea-shooters, quartzes – which he arranged in front of him like chessmen. Returning from the missions on which Kublai sent him, the ingenious foreigner improvised pantomimes that the sovereign had to interpret: one city was depicted by the leap of a fish escaping the cormorant’s beak to fall into a net; another city by a naked man running through fire unscorched; a third by a skull, its teeth green with mold, clenching a round, white pearl. The Great Khan deciphered the signs, but the connection between them and the places visited remained uncertain; he never knew whether Marco wished to enact an adventure that had befallen him on his journey, an exploit of the city’s founder, the prophecy of an astrologer, a rebus or a charade to indicate a name. But, obscure or obvious as it might be, everything Marco displayed had the power of emblems, which, once seen, cannot be forgotten or confused. In the Khan’s mind the empire was reflected in a desert of labile and interchangeable data, like grains of sand, from which there appeared, for each city and province, the figures evoked by the Venetian’s logogriphs.

As the seasons passed and his missions continued, Marco mastered the Tartar language and the national idioms and tribal dialects. Now his accounts were the most precise and detailed that the Great Khan could wish and there was no question or curiosity which they did not satisfy. And yet each piece of information about a place recalled to the emperor’s mind that first gesture or object with which Marco had designated the place. The new fact received a meaning from that emblem and also added to the emblem a new meaning. Perhaps, Kublai thought, the empire is nothing but a zodiac of the mind’s phantasms.

“On the day when I know all the emblems,” he asked Marco, “shall I be able to possess my empire, at last?”

And the Venetian answered: “Sire, do not believe it. On that day you will be an emblem among emblems.”





2





“The other ambassadors warn me of famines, extortions, conspiracies, or else they inform me of newly discovered turquoise mines, advantageous prices in marten furs, suggestions for supplying damascened blades. And you?” the Great Khan asked Polo. “You return from lands equally distant and you can tell me only the thoughts that come to a man who sits on his doorstep at evening to enjoy the cool air. What is the use, then, of all your traveling?”

“It is evening. We are seated on the steps of your palace. There is a slight breeze,” Marco Polo answered. “Whatever country my words may evoke around you, you will see it from such a vantage point, even if instead of the palace there is a village on pilings and the breeze carries the stench of a muddy estuary.”

“My gaze it that of a man meditating, lost in thought – I admit it. But yours? You cross archipelagoes, tundras, mountain ranges. You would do as well never moving from here.”

The Venetian knew that when Kublai became vexed with him, the emperor wanted to follow more clearly a private train of thought; so Marco’s answers and objections took their place in a discourse already proceeding on its own, in the Great Khan’s head. That is to say, between the two of them it did not matter whether questions and solutions were uttered aloud or whether each of the two went on pondering in silence. In fact, they were silent, their eyes half-closed, reclining on cushions, swaying in hammocks, smoking long amber pipes.

Marco Polo imagined answering (or Kublai Khan imagined his answer) that the more one was lost in unfamiliar quarters of distant cities, the more one understood the other cities he had crossed to arrive there; and he retraced the stages of his journeys, and he came to know the port from which he had set sail, and the familiar places of his youth, and the surroundings of home, and a little square of Venice where he gamboled as a child.

At this point Kublai Khan interrupted him or imagined interrupting him, or Marco Polo imagined himself interrupted, with a question such as: “You advance always with your head turned back?” or “Is what you see always behind you?” or rather, “Does your journey take place only in the past?”

All this so that Marco Polo could explain or imagine explaining or be imagined explaining or succeed finally in explaining to himself that what he sought was always something lying ahead, and even if it was a matter of the past it was a past that changed gradually as he advanced on his journey, because the traveler’s past changes according to the route he has followed: not the immediate past, that is, to which each day that goes by adds a day, but the more remote past. Arriving at each new city, the traveler finds again a past of his that he did not know he had: the foreignness of what you no longer are or no longer possess lies in wait for you in foreign, unpossessed places.

Marco enters a city; he sees someone in a square living a life or an instant that could be his; he could now be in that man’s place, if he had stopped in time, long ago; or if, long ago, at a crossroads, instead of taking one road he had taken the opposite one, and after long wandering he had come to be in the place of that man in that square. By now, from that real or hypothetical past of his, he is excluded; he cannot stop; he must go on to another city, where another of his pasts awaits him, or something perhaps that had been a possible future of his and is now someone else’s present. Futures not achieved are only branches of the past: dead branches.

“Journeys to relive your past?” was the Khan’s question at this point, a question which could also have been formulated: “Journeys to recover your future?”

And Marco’s answer was: “Elsewhere is a negative mirror. The traveler recognizes the little that is his, discovering the much he has not had and will never have.”





CITIES & MEMORY • 5

IN MAURILIA, THE traveler is invited to visit the city and, at the same time, to examine some old postcards that show it as it used to be: the same identical square with a hen in the place of the bus station, a bandstand in the place of the overpass, two young ladies with white parasols in the place of the munitions factory. If the traveler does not wish to disappoint the inhabitants, he must praise the postcard city and prefer it to the present one, though he must be careful to contain his regret at the changes within definite limits: admitting that the magnificence and prosperity of the metropolis Maurilia, when compared to the old, provincial Maurilia, cannot compensate for a certain lost grace, which, however, can be appreciated only now in the old postcards, whereas before, when that provincial Maurilia was before one’s eyes, one saw absolutely nothing graceful and would see it even less today, if Maurilia had remained unchanged; and in any case the metropolis has the added attraction that, through what it has become, one can look back with nostalgia at what it was.

Beware of saying to them that sometimes different cities follow one another on the same site and under the same name, born and dying without knowing one another, without communication among themselves. At times even the names of the inhabitants remain the same, and their voices’ accent, and also the features of the faces; but the gods who live beneath names and above places have gone off without a word and outsiders have settled in their place. It is pointless to ask whether the new ones are better or worse than the old, since there is no connection between them, just as the old postcards do not depict Maurilia as it was, but a different city which, by chance, was called Maurilia, like this one.





CITIES & DESIRE • 4

IN THE CENTER of Fedora, that gray stone metropolis, stands a metal building with a crystal globe in every room. Looking into each globe, you see a blue city, the model of a different Fedora. These are the forms the city could have taken if, for one reason or another, it had not become what we see today. In every age someone, looking at Fedora as it was, imagined a way of making it the ideal city, but while he constructed his miniature model, Fedora was already no longer the same as before, and what had been until yesterday a possible future became only a toy in a glass globe.

The building with the globes is now Fedora’s museum: every inhabitant visits it, chooses the city that corresponds to his desires, contemplates it, imagining his reflection in the medusa pond that would have collected the waters of the canal (if it had not been dried up), the view from the high canopied box along the avenue reserved for elephants (now banished from the city), the fun of sliding down the spiral, twisting minaret (which never found a pedestal from which to rise).

On the map of your empire, O Great Khan, there must be room both for the big, stone Fedora and the little Fedoras in glass globes. Not because they are all equally real, but because all are only assumptions. The one contains what is accepted as necessary when it is not yet so; the others, what is imagined as possible and, a moment later, is possible no longer.





CITIES & SIGNS • 3

THE MAN WHO is traveling and does not yet know the city awaiting him along his route wonders what the palace will be like, the barracks, the mill, the theater, the bazaar. In every city of the empire every building is different and set in a different order: but as soon as the stranger arrives at the unknown city and his eye penetrates the pine cone of pagodas and garrets and haymows, following the scrawl of canals, gardens, rubbish heaps, he immediately distinguishes which are the princes’ palaces, the high priests’ temples, the tavern, the prison, the slum. This – some say – confirms the hypothesis that each man bears in his mind a city made only of differences, a city without figures and without form, and the individual cities fill it up.

This is not true of Zoe. In every point of this city you can, in turn, sleep, make tools, cook, accumulate gold, disrobe, reign, sell, question oracles. Any one of its pyramid roofs could cover the leprosarium or the odalisques’ baths. The traveler roams all around and has nothing but doubts: he is unable to distinguish the features of the city, the features he keeps distinct in his mind also mingle. He infers this: if existence in all its moments is all of itself, Zoe is the place of indivisible existence. But why, then, does the city exist? What line separates the inside from the outside, the rumble of wheels from the howl of wolves?





THIN CITIES • 2

NOW I SHALL tell of the city of Zenobia, which is wonderful in this fashion: though set on dry terrain it stands on high pilings, and the houses are of bamboo and zinc, with many platforms and balconies placed on stilts at various heights, crossing one another, linked by ladders and hanging sidewalks, surmounted by cone-roofed belvederes, barrels storing water, weather vanes, jutting pulleys, and fish poles, and cranes.

No one remembers what need or command or desire drove Zenobia’s founders to give their city this form, and so there is no telling whether it was satisfied by the city as we see it today, which has perhaps grown through successive superimpositions from the first, now undecipherable plan. But what is certain is that if you ask an inhabitant of Zenobia to describe his vision of a happy life, it is always a city like Zenobia that he imagines, with its pilings and its suspended stairways, a Zenobia perhaps quite different, a-flutter with banners and ribbons, but always derived by combining elements of that first model.

This said, it is pointless trying to decide whether Zenobia is to be classified among happy cities or among the unhappy. It makes no sense to divide cities into these two species, but rather into another two: those that through the years and the changes continue to give their form to desires, and those in which desires either erase the city or are erased by it.





TRADING CITIES • 1

PROCEEDING EIGHTY MILES into the northwest wind, you reach the city of Euphemia, where the merchants of seven nations gather at every solstice and equinox. The boat that lands there with a cargo of ginger and cotton will set sail again, its hold filled with pistachio nuts and poppy seeds, and the caravan that has just unloaded sacks of nutmegs and raisins is already cramming its saddlebags with bolts of golden muslin for the return journey. But what drives men to travel up rivers and cross deserts to come here is not only the exchange of wares, which you could find, everywhere the same, in all the bazaars inside and outside the Great Khan’s empire, scattered at your feet on the same yellow mats, in the shade of the same awnings protecting them from the flies, offered with the same lying reduction in prices. You do not come to Euphemia only to buy and sell, but also because at night, by the fires all around the market, seated on sacks or barrels or stretched out on piles of carpets, at each word that one man says – such as “wolf,” “sister,” “hidden treasure,” “battle,” “scabies,” “lovers” – the others tell, each one, his tale of wolves, sisters, treasures, scabies, lovers, battles. And you know that in the long journey ahead of you, when to keep awake against the camel’s swaying or the junk’s rocking, you start summoning up your memories one by one, your wolf will have become another wolf, your sister a different sister, your battle other battles, on your return from Euphemia, the city where memory is traded at every solstice and at every equinox.





. . . Newly arrived and quite ignorant of the languages of the Levant, Marco Polo could express himself only by drawing objects from his baggage – drums, salt fish, necklaces of warthogs’ teeth – and pointing to them with gestures, leaps, cries of wonder or of horror, imitating the bay of the jackal, the hoot of the owl.

The connections between one element of the story and another were not always obvious to the emperor; the objects could have various meanings: a quiver filled with arrows could indicate the approach of war, or an abundance of game, or else an armorer’s shop; an hourglass could mean time passing, or time past, or sand, or a place where hourglasses are made.

But what enhanced for Kublai every event or piece of news reported by his inarticulate informer was the space that remained around it, a void not filled with words. The descriptions of cities Marco Polo visited had this virtue: you could wander through them in thought, become lost, stop and enjoy the cool air, or run off.

As time went by, words began to replace objects and gestures in Marco’s tales: first exclamations, isolated nouns, dry verbs, then phrases, ramified and leafy discourses, metaphors and tropes. The foreigner had learned to speak the emperor’s language or the emperor to understand the language of the foreigner.

But you would have said communication between them was less happy than in the past: to be sure, words were more useful than objects and gestures in listing the most important things of every province and city – monuments, markets, costumes, fauna and flora – and yet when Polo began to talk about how life must be in those places, day after day, evening after evening, words failed him, and little by little, he went back to relying on gestures, grimaces, glances.

So, for each city, after the fundamental information given in precise words, he followed with a mute commentary, holding up his hands, palms out, or backs, or sideways, in straight or oblique movements, spasmodic or slow. A new kind of dialogue was established: the Great Khan’s white hands, heavy with rings, answered with stately movements the sinewy, agile hands of the merchant. As an understanding grew between them, their hands began to assume fixed attitudes, each of which corresponded to a shift of mood, in their alternation and repetition. And as the vocabulary of things was renewed with new samples of merchandise, the repertory of mute comment tended to become closed, stable. The pleasure of falling back on it also diminished in both; in their conversations, most of the time, they remained silent and immobile.





3





Kublai Khan had noticed that Marco Polo’s cities resembled one another, as if the passage from one to another involved not a journey but a change of elements. Now, from each city Marco described to him, the Great Khan’s mind set out on its own, and after dismantling the city piece by piece, he reconstructed it in other ways, substituting components, shifting them, inverting them.

Marco, meanwhile, continued reporting his journey, but the emperor was no longer listening.

Kublai interrupted him: “From now on I shall describe the cities and you will tell me if they exist and are as I have conceived them. I shall begin by asking you about a city of stairs, exposed to the sirocco, on a half-moon bay. Now I shall list some of the wonders it contains: a glass tank high as a cathedral so people can follow the swimming and flying of the swallow fish and draw auguries from them; a palm tree which plays the harp with its fronds in the wind; a square with a horseshoe marble table around it, a marble tablecloth, set with foods and beverages also of marble.”

“Sire, your mind has been wandering. This is precisely the city I was telling you about when you interrupted me.”

“You know it? Where is it? What is its name?”

“It has neither name nor place. I shall repeat the reason why I was describing it to you: from the number of imaginable cities we must exclude those whose elements are assembled without a connecting thread, an inner rule, a perspective, a discourse. With cities, it is as with dreams: everything imaginable can be dreamed, but even the most unexpected dream is a rebus that conceals a desire or, its reverse, a fear. Cities, like dreams, are made of desires and fears, even if the thread of their discourse is secret, their rules are absurd, their perspectives deceitful, and everything conceals something else.”

“I have neither desires nor fears,” the Khan declared, “and my dreams are composed either by my mind or by chance.”

“Cities also believe they are the work of the mind or of chance, but neither the one nor the other suffices to hold up their walls. You take delight not in a city’s seven or seventy wonders, but in the answer it gives to a question of yours.”

“Or the question it asks you, forcing you to answer, like Thebes through the mouth of the Sphinx.”





CITIES & DESIRE • 5

FROM THERE, AFTER six days and seven nights, you arrive at Zobeide, the white city, well exposed to the moon, with streets wound about themselves as in a skein. They tell this tale of its foundation: men of various nations had an identical dream. They saw a woman running at night through an unknown city; she was seen from behind, with long hair, and she was naked. They dreamed of pursuing her. As they twisted and turned, each of them lost her. After the dream they set out in search of that city; they never found it, but they found one another; they decided to build a city like the one in the dream. In laying out the streets, each followed the course of his pursuit; at the spot where they had lost the fugitive’s trail, they arranged spaces and walls differently from the dream, so she would be unable to escape again.

This was the city of Zobeide, where they settled, waiting for that scene to be repeated one night. None of them, asleep or awake, ever saw the woman again. The city’s streets were streets where they went to work every day, with no link any more to the dreamed chase. Which, for that matter, had long been forgotten.

New men arrived from other lands, having had a dream like theirs, and in the city of Zobeide, they recognized something of the streets of the dream, and they changed the positions of arcades and stairways to resemble more closely the path of the pursued woman and so, at the spot where she had vanished, there would remain no avenue of escape.

The first to arrive could not understand what drew these people to Zobeide, this ugly city, this trap.





CITIES & SIGNS • 4

OF ALL THE changes of language a traveler in distant lands must face, none equals that which awaits him in the city of Hypatia, because the change regards not words, but things. I entered Hypatia one morning, a magnolia garden was reflected in blue lagoons, I walked among the hedges, sure I would discover young and beautiful ladies bathing; but at the bottom of the water, crabs were biting the eyes of the suicides, stones tied around their necks, their hair green with seaweed.

I felt cheated and I decided to demand justice of the sultan. I climbed the porphyry steps of the palace with the highest domes, I crossed six tiled courtyards with fountains. The central hall was barred by iron gratings: convicts with black chains on their feet were hauling up basalt blocks from a quarry that opened underground.

I could only question the philosophers. I entered the great library, I became lost among shelves collapsing under the vellum bindings, I followed the alphabetical order of vanished alphabets, up and down halls, stairs, bridges. In the most remote papyrus cabinet, in a cloud of smoke, the dazed eyes of an adolescent appeared to me, as he lay on a mat, his lips glued to an opium pipe.

“Where is the sage?”

The smoker pointed out of the window. It was a garden with children’s games: ninepins, a swing, a top. The philosopher was seated on the lawn. He said: “Signs form a language, but not the one you think you know.”

I realized I had to free myself from the images which in the past had announced to me the things I sought: only then would I succeed in understanding the language of Hypatia.

Now I have only to hear the neighing of horses and the cracking of whips and I am seized with amorous trepidation: in Hypatia you have to go to the stables and riding rings to see the beautiful women who mount the saddle, thighs naked, greaves on their calves, and as soon as a young foreigner approaches, they fling him on the piles of hay or sawdust and press their firm nipples against him.

And when my spirit wants no stimulus or nourishment save music, I know it is to be sought in the cemeteries: the musicians hide in the tombs; from grave to grave flute trills, harp chords answer one another.

True, also in Hypatia the day will come when my only desire will be to leave. I know I must not go down to the harbor then, but climb the citadel’s highest pinnacle and wait for a ship to go by up there. But will it ever go by? There is no language without deceit.





THIN CITIES • 3

WHETHER ARMILLA IS like this because it is unfinished or because it has been demolished, whether the cause is some enchantment or only a whim, I do not know. The fact remains that it has no walls, no ceilings, no floors: it has nothing that makes it seem a city, except the water pipes that rise vertically where the houses should be and spread out horizontally where the floors should be: a forest of pipes that end in taps, showers, spouts, overflows. Against the sky a lavabo’s white stands out, or a bathtub, or some other porcelain, like late fruit still hanging from the boughs. You would think the plumbers had finished their job and gone away before the bricklayers arrived; or else their hydraulic systems, indestructible, had survived a catastrophe, an earthquake, or the corrosion of termites.

Abandoned before or after it was inhabited, Armilla cannot be called deserted. At any hour, raising your eyes among the pipes, you are likely to glimpse a young woman, or many young women, slender, not tall of stature, luxuriating in the bathtubs or arching their backs under the showers suspended in the void, washing or drying or perfuming themselves, or combing their long hair at a mirror. In the sun, the threads of water fanning from the showers glisten, the jets of the taps, the spurts, the splashes, the sponges’ suds.

I have come to this explanation: the streams of water channeled in the pipes of Armilla have remained in the possession of nymphs and naiads. Accustomed to traveling along underground veins, they found it easy to enter into the new aquatic realm, to burst from multiple fountains, to find new mirrors, new games, new ways of enjoying the water. Their invasion may have driven out the human beings, or Armilla may have been built by humans as a votive offering to win the favor of the nymphs, offended at the misuse of the waters. In any case, now they seem content, these maidens: in the morning you hear them singing.





TRADING CITIES • 2

IN CHLOE, A great city, the people who move through the streets are all strangers. At each encounter, they imagine a thousand things about one another; meetings which could take place between them, conversations, surprises, caresses, bites. But no one greets anyone; eyes lock for a second, then dart away, seeking other eyes, never stopping.

A girl comes along, twirling a parasol on her shoulder, and twirling slightly also her rounded hips. A woman in black comes along, showing her full age, her eyes restless beneath her veil, her lips trembling. A tattooed giant comes along; a young man with white hair; a female dwarf; two girls, twins, dressed in coral. Something runs among them, an exchange of glances like lines that connect one figure with another and draw arrows, stars, triangles, until all combinations are used up in a moment, and other characters come on to the scene: a blind man with a cheetah on a leash, a courtesan with an ostrich-plume fan, an ephebe, a Fat Woman. And thus, when some people happen to find themselves together, taking shelter from the rain under an arcade, or crowding beneath an awning of the bazaar, or stopping to listen to the band in the square, meetings, seductions, copulations, orgies are consummated among them without a word exchanged, without a finger touching anything, almost without an eye raised.

A voluptuous vibration constantly stirs Chloe, the most chaste of cities. If men and women began to live their ephemeral dreams, every phantom would become a person with whom to begin a story of pursuits, pretenses, misunderstandings, clashes, oppressions, and the carousel of fantasies would stop.





CITIES & EYES • 1

THE ANCIENTS BUILT Valdrada on the shores of a lake, with houses all verandas one above the other, and high streets whose railed parapets look out over the water. Thus the traveler, arriving, sees two cities: one erect above the lake, and the other reflected, upside down. Nothing exists or happens in the one Valdrada that the other Valdrada does not repeat, because the city was so constructed that its every point would be reflected in its mirror, and the Valdrada down in the water contains not only all the flutings and juttings of the facades that rise above the lake, but also the rooms’ interiors with ceilings and floors, the perspective of the halls, the mirrors of the wardrobes.

Valdrada’s inhabitants know that each of their actions is, at once, that action and its mirror-image, which possesses the special dignity of images, and this awareness prevents them from succumbing for a single moment to chance and forgetfulness. Even when lovers twist their naked bodies, skin against skin, seeking the position that will give one the most pleasure in the other, even when murderers plunge the knife into the black veins of the neck and more clotted blood pours out the more they press the blade that slips between the tendons, it is not so much their copulating or murdering that matters as the copulating or murdering of the images, limpid and cold in the mirror.

At times the mirror increases a thing’s value, at times denies it. Not everything that seems valuable above the mirror maintains its force when mirrored. The twin cities are not equal, because nothing that exists or happens in Valdrada is symmetrical: every face and gesture is answered, from the mirror, by a face and gesture inverted, point by point. The two Valdradas live for each other, their eyes interlocked; but there is no love between them.





The Great Khan has dreamed of a city; he describes it to Marco Polo:

“The harbor faces north, in shadow. The docks are high over the black water, which slams against the retaining walls; stone steps descend, made slippery by seaweed. Boats smeared with tar are tied up, waiting for the departing passengers lingering on the quay to bid their families farewell. The farewells take place in silence, but with tears. It is cold; all wear shawls over their heads. A shout from the boatman puts a stop to the delays; the traveler huddles at the prow, moves off looking toward the group of those remaining behind; from the shore his features can no longer be discerned; the boat draws up beside a vessel riding at anchor; on the ladder a diminished form climbs up, vanishes; the rusted chain is heard being raised, scraping against the hawsepipe. The people remaining behind look over the ramparts above the rocks of the pier, their eyes following the ship until it rounds the cape; for the last time they wave a white rag.

“Set out, explore every coast, and seek this city,” the Khan says to Marco. “Then come back and tell me if my dream corresponds to reality.”

“Forgive me, my lord, there is no doubt that sooner or later I shall set sail from that dock,” Marco says, “but I shall not come back to tell you about it. The city exists and it has a simple secret: it knows only departures, not returns.”





4





Lips clenched on the pipe’s amber stem, his beard flattened against his amethyst choker, his big toes nervously arched in his silken slippers, Kublai Khan listened to Marco Polo’s tales without raising an eyebrow. These were the evenings when a shadow of hypochondria weighed on his heart.

“Your cities do not exist. Perhaps they have never existed. It is sure they will never exist again. Why do you amuse yourself with consolatory fables? I know well that my empire is rotting like a corpse in a swamp, whose contagion infects the crows that peck it as well as the bamboo that grows, fertilized by its humors. Why do you not speak to me of this? Why do you lie to the emperor of the Tartars, foreigner?”

Polo knew it was best to fall in with the sovereign’s dark mood. “Yes, the empire is sick, and, what is worse, it is trying to become accustomed to its sores. This is the aim of my explorations: examining the traces of happiness still to be glimpsed, I gauge its short supply. If you want to know how much darkness there is around you, you must sharpen your eyes, peering at the faint lights in the distance.”

At other times, however, the Khan was seized by fits of euphoria. He would rise up on his cushions, measure with long strides the carpets spread over the paths at his feet, look out from the balustrades of the terraces to survey with dazzled eye the expanse of the palace gardens lighted by the lanterns hung from the cedars.

“And yet I know,” he would say, “that my empire is made of the stuff of crystals, its molecules arranged in a perfect pattern. Amid the surge of the elements, a splendid hard diamond takes shape, an immense, faceted, transparent mountain. Why do your travel impressions stop at disappointing appearances, never catching this implacable process? Why do you linger over inessential melancholies? Why do you hide from the emperor the grandeur of his destiny?”

And Marco answered: “While, at a sign from you, sire, the unique and final city raises its stainless walls, I am collecting the ashes of the other possible cities that vanish to make room for it, cities that can never be rebuilt or remembered. When you know at last the residue of unhappiness for which no precious stone can compensate, you will be able to calculate the exact number of carats toward which that final diamond must strive. Otherwise, your calculations will be mistaken from the very start.”





CITIES & SIGNS • 5

NO ONE, WISE Kublai, knows better than you that the city must never be confused with the words that describe it. And yet between the one and the other there is a connection. If I describe to you Olivia, a city rich in products and in profits, I can indicate its prosperity only by speaking of filigree palaces with fringed cushions on the seats by the mullioned windows. Beyond the screen of a patio, spinning jets water a lawn where a white peacock spreads its tail. But from these words you realize at once how Olivia is shrouded in a cloud of soot and grease that sticks to the houses, that in the brawling streets, the shifting trailers crush pedestrians against the walls. If I must speak to you of the inhabitants’ industry, I speak of the saddlers’ shops smelling of leather, of the women chattering as they weave raffia rugs, of the hanging canals whose cascades move the paddles of the mills; but the image these words evoke in your enlightened mind is of the mandrel set against the teeth of the lathe, an action repeated by thousands of hands thousands of times at the pace established for each shift. If I must explain to you how Olivia’s spirit tends toward a free life and a refined civilization, I will tell you of ladies who glide at night in illuminated canoes between the banks of a green estuary; but it is only to remind you that on the outskirts where men and women land every evening like lines of sleepwalkers, there is always someone who bursts out laughing in the darkness, releasing the flow of jokes and sarcasm.

This perhaps you do not know: that to talk of Olivia, I could not use different words. If there really were an Olivia of mullioned windows and peacocks, of saddlers and rug-weavers and canoes and estuaries, it would be a wretched, black, fly-ridden hole, and to describe it, I would have to fall back on the metaphors of soot, the creaking of wheels, repeated actions, sarcasm. Falsehood is never in words; it is in things.





THIN CITIES • 4

THE CITY OF Sophronia is made up of two half-cities. In one there is the great roller coaster with its steep humps, the carousel with its chain spokes, the Ferris wheel of spinning cages, the death-ride with crouching motorcyclists, the big top with the clump of trapezes hanging in the middle. The other half-city is of stone and marble and cement, with the bank, the factories, the palaces, the slaughterhouse, the school, and all the rest. One of the half-cities is permanent, the other is temporary, and when the period of its sojourn is over, they uproot it, dismantle it, and take it off, transplanting it to the vacant lots of another half-city.

And so every year the day comes when the workmen remove the marble pediments, lower the stone walls, the cement pylons, take down the Ministry, the monument, the docks, the petroleum refinery, the hospital, load them on trailers, to follow from stand to stand their annual itinerary. Here remains the half-Sophronia of the shooting-galleries and the carousels, the shout suspended from the cart of the headlong roller coaster, and it begins to count the months, the days it must wait before the caravan returns and a complete life can begin again.





TRADING CITIES • 3

WHEN HE ENTERS the territory of which Eutropia is the capital, the traveler sees not one city but many, of equal size and not unlike one another, scattered over a vast, rolling plateau. Eutropia is not one, but all these cities together; only one is inhabited at a time, the others are empty; and this process is carried out in rotation. Now I shall tell you how. On the day when Eutropia’s inhabitants feel the grip of weariness and no one can bear any longer his job, his relatives, his house and his life, debts, the people he must greet or who greet him, then the whole citizenry decides to move to the next city, which is there waiting for them, empty and good as new; there each will take up a new job, a different wife, will see another landscape on opening his window, and will spend his time with different pastimes, friends, gossip. So their life is renewed from move to move, among cities whose exposure or declivity or streams or winds make each site somehow different from the others. Since their society is ordered without great distinctions of wealth or authority, the passage from one function to another takes place almost without jolts; variety is guaranteed by the multiple assignments, so that in the span of a lifetime a man rarely returns to a job that has already been his.

Thus the city repeats its life, identical, shifting up and down on its empty chessboard. The inhabitants repeat the same scenes, with the actors changed; they repeat the same speeches with variously combined accents; they open alternate mouths in identical yawns. Alone, among all the cities of the empire, Eutropia remains always the same. Mercury, god of the fickle, to whom the city is sacred, worked this ambiguous miracle.





CITIES & EYES • 2

IT IS THE MOOD of the beholder which gives the city of Zemrude its form. If you go by whistling, your nose a-tilt behind the whistle, you will know it from below: window sills, flapping curtains, fountains. If you walk along hanging your head, your nails dug into the palms of your hands, your gaze will be held on the ground, in the gutters, the manhole covers, the fish scales, wastepaper. You cannot say that one aspect of the city is truer than the other, but you hear of the upper Zemrude chiefly from those who remember it, as they sink into the lower Zemrude, following every day the same stretches of street and finding again each morning the ill-humor of the day before, encrusted at the foot of the walls. For everyone, sooner or later, the day comes when we bring our gaze down along the drainpipes and we can no longer detach it from the cobblestones. The reverse is not impossible, but it is more rare: and so we continue walking through Zemrude’s streets with eyes now digging into the cellars, the foundations, the wells.





CITIES & NAMES • 1

THERE IS LITTLE I can tell you about Aglaura beyond the things its own inhabitants have always repeated: an array of proverbial virtues, of equally proverbial faults, a few eccentricities, some punctilious regard for rules. Ancient observers, whom there is no reason not to presume truthful, attributed to Aglaura its enduring assortment of qualities, surely comparing them to those of the other cities of their times. Perhaps neither the Aglaura that is reported nor the Aglaura that is visible has greatly changed since then, but what was bizarre has become usual, what seemed normal is now an oddity, and virtues and faults have lost merit or dishonor in a code of virtues and faults differently distributed. In this sense, nothing said of Aglaura is true, and yet these accounts create a solid and compact image of a city, whereas the haphazard opinions which might be inferred from living there have less substance. This is the result: the city that they speak of has much of what is needed to exist, whereas the city that exists on its site, exists less.

So if I wished to describe Aglaura to you, sticking to what I personally saw and experienced, I should have to tell you that it is a colorless city, without character, planted there at random. But this would not be true, either: at certain hours, in certain places along the street, you see opening before you the hint of something unmistakable, rare, perhaps magnificent; you would like to say what it is, but everything previously said of Aglaura imprisons your words and obliges you to repeat rather than say.

Therefore, the inhabitants still believe they live in an Aglaura which grows only with the name Aglaura and they do not notice the Aglaura that grows on the ground. And even I, who would like to keep the two cities distinct in my memory, can speak only of the one, because the recollection of the other, in the lack of words to fix it, has been lost.





“From now on, I’ll describe the cities to you,” the Khan had said, “in your journeys you will see if they exist.”

But the cities visited by Marco Polo were always different from those thought of by the emperor.

“And yet I have constructed in my mind a model city from which all possible cities can be deduced,” Kublai said. “It contains everything corresponding to the norm. Since the cities that exist diverge in varying degree from the norm, I need only foresee the exceptions to the norm and calculate the most probable combinations.”

“I have also thought of a model city from which I deduce all the others,” Marco answered. “It is a city made only of exceptions, exclusions, incongruities, contradictions. If such a city is the most improbable, by reducing the number of abnormal elements, we increase the probability that the city really exists. So I have only to subtract exceptions from my model, and in whatever direction I proceed, I will arrive at one of the cities which, always as an exception, exist. But I cannot force my operation beyond a certain limit: I would achieve cities too probable to be real.”





5





From the high balustrade of the palace the Great Khan watches his empire grow. First the line of the boundaries had expanded to embrace conquered territories, but the regiments’ advance encountered half-deserted regions, scrubby villages of huts, marshes where the rice refused to sprout, emaciated peoples, dried rivers, reeds. “My empire has grown too far toward the outside. It is time,” the Khan thought, “for it to grow within itself,” and he dreamed of pomegranate groves, the fruit so ripe it burst its skin, zebus browning on the spit and dripping fat, veins of metal surfacing in landslips with glistening nuggets.

Now many seasons of abundance have filled the granaries. The rivers in flood have borne forests of beams to support the bronze roofs of temples and palaces. Caravans of slaves have shifted mountains of serpentine marble across the continent. The Great Khan contemplates an empire covered with cities that weigh upon the earth and upon mankind, crammed with wealth and traffic, overladen with ornaments and offices, complicated with mechanisms and hierarchies, swollen, tense, ponderous.

“The empire is being crushed by its own weight,” Kublai thinks, and in his dreams now cities light as kites appear, pierced cities like laces, cities transparent as mosquito netting, cities like leaves’ veins, cities lined like a hand’s palm, filigree cities to be seen through their opaque and fictitious thickness.

“I shall tell you what I dreamed last night,” he says to Marco. “In the midst of a flat and yellow land, dotted with meteorites and erratic boulders, I saw from a distance the spires of a city rise, slender pinnacles, made in such a way that the moon in her journey can rest now on one, now on another, or sway from the cables of the cranes.”

And Polo says: “The city of your dream is Lalage. Its inhabitants arranged these invitations to rest in the night sky so that the moon would grant everything in the city the power to grow and grow endlessly.”

“There is something you do not know,” the Khan adds. “The grateful moon has granted the city of Lalage a rarer privilege: to grow in lightness.”





THIN CITIES • 5

IF YOU CHOOSE to believe me, good. Now I will tell how Octavia, the spider-web city, is made. There is a precipice between two steep mountains: the city is over the void, bound to the two crests with ropes and chains and catwalks. You walk on the little wooden ties, careful not to set your foot in the open spaces, or you cling to the hempen strands. Below there is nothing for hundreds and hundreds of feet: a few clouds glide past; farther down you can glimpse the chasm’s bed.

This is the foundation of the city: a net which serves as passage and as support. All the rest, instead of rising up, is hung below: rope ladders, hammocks, houses made like sacks, clothes hangers, terraces like gondolas, skins of water, gas jets, spits, baskets on strings, dumb-waiters, showers, trapezes and rings for children’s games, cable cars, chandeliers, pots with trailing plants.

Suspended over the abyss, the life of Octavia’s inhabitants is less uncertain than in other cities. They know the net will last only so long.





TRADING CITIES • 4

IN ERSILIA, TO establish the relationships that sustain the city’s life, the inhabitants stretch strings from the corners of the houses, white or black or gray or black-and-white according to whether they mark a relationship of blood, of trade, authority, agency. When the strings become so numerous that you can no longer pass among them, the inhabitants leave: the houses are dismantled; only the strings and their supports remain.

From a mountainside, camping with their household goods, Ersilia’s refugees look at the labyrinth of taut strings and poles that rise in the plain. That is the city of Ersilia still, and they are nothing.

They rebuild Ersilia elsewhere. They weave a similar pattern of strings which they would like to be more complex and at the same time more regular than the other. Then they abandon it and take themselves and their houses still farther away.

Thus, when traveling in the territory of Ersilia, you come upon the ruins of the abandoned cities, without the walls which do not last, without the bones of the dead which the wind rolls away: spider-webs of intricate relationships seeking a form.





CITIES & EYES • 3

AFTER A SEVEN days’ march through woodland, the traveler directed toward Baucis cannot see the city and yet he has arrived. The slender stilts that rise from the ground at a great distance from one another and are lost above the clouds support the city. You climb them with ladders. On the ground the inhabitants rarely show themselves: having already everything they need up there, they prefer not to come down. Nothing of the city touches the earth except those long flamingo legs on which it rests and, when the days are sunny, a pierced, angular shadow that falls on the foliage.

There are three hypotheses about the inhabitants of Baucis: that they hate the earth; that they respect it so much they avoid all contact; that they love it as it was before they existed and with spyglasses and telescopes aimed downward they never tire of examining it, leaf by leaf, stone by stone, ant by ant, contemplating with fascination their own absence.





CITIES & NAMES • 2

GODS OF TWO species protect the city of Leandra. Both are too tiny to be seen and too numerous to be counted. One species stands at the doors of the houses, inside, next to the coat rack and the umbrella stand; in moves, they follow the families and install themselves in the new home at the consignment of the keys. The others stay in the kitchen, hiding by preference under pots or in the chimney flue or broom closet: they belong to the house, and when the family that has lived there goes away, they remain with the new tenants; perhaps they were already there before the house existed, among the weeds of the vacant lot, concealed in a rusty can; if the house is torn down and a huge block of fifty families is built in its place, they will be found, multiplied, in the kitchens of that many apartments. To distinguish the two species we will call the first one Penates and the other Lares.

Within a given house, Lares do not necessarily stay with Lares, and Penates with Penates: they visit one another, they stroll together on the stucco cornices, on the radiator pipes; they comment on family events; not infrequently they quarrel; but they can also get along peacefully for years – seeing them all in a row, you are unable to tell them apart. The Lares have seen Penates of the most varied origins and customs pass through their walls; the Penates have to make a place for themselves, rubbing elbows with Lares of illustrious, but decaying palaces, full of hauteur, or with Lares from tin shacks, susceptible and distrustful.

The true essence of Leandra is the subject of endless debate. The Penates believe they are the city’s soul, even if they arrived last year; and they believe they take Leandra with them when they emigrate. The Lares consider the Penates temporary guests, importunate, intrusive; the real Leandra is theirs, which gives form to all it contains, the Leandra that was there before all these upstarts arrived and that will remain when all have gone away.

The two species have this in common: whatever happens in the family and in the city, they always criticize. The Penates bring out the old people, the great-grandparents, the great-aunts, the family of the past; the Lares talk about the environment before it was ruined. But this does not mean they live only on memories: they daydream of the careers the children will follow when they grow up (the Penates), or what this house in this neighborhood might become (the Lares) if it were in good hands. If you listen carefully, especially at night, you can hear them in the houses of Leandra, murmuring steadily, interrupting one another, huffing, bantering, amid ironic, stifled laughter.





CITIES & THE DEAD • 1

At Melania, every time you enter the square, you find yourself caught in a dialogue: the braggart soldier and the parasite coming from a door meet the young wastrel and the prostitute; or else the miserly father from his threshold utters his final warnings to the amorous daughter and is interrupted by the foolish servant who is taking a note to the procuress. You return to Melania after years and you find the same dialogue still going on; in the meanwhile the parasite has died, and so have the procuress and the miserly father; but the braggart soldier, the amorous daughter, the foolish servant have taken their places, being replaced in their turn by the hypocrite, the confidante, the astrologer.

Melania’s population renews itself: the participants in the dialogues die one by one and meanwhile those who will take their places are born, some in one role, some in another. When one changes role or abandons the square forever or makes his first entrance into it, there is a series of changes, until all the roles have been reassigned; but meanwhile the angry old man goes on replying to the witty maidservant, the usurer never ceases following the disinherited youth, the nurse consoles the stepdaughter, even if none of them keeps the same eyes and voice he had in the previous scene.

At times it may happen that a sole person will simultaneously take on two or more roles – tyrant, benefactor, messenger – or one role may be doubled, multiplied, assigned to a hundred, a thousand inhabitants of Melania: three thousand for the hypocrite, thirty thousand for the sponger, a hundred thousand king’s sons fallen in low estate and awaiting recognition.

As time passes the roles, too, are no longer exactly the same as before; certainly the action they carry forward through intrigues and surprises leads toward some final denouement, which it continues to approach even when the plot seems to thicken more and more and the obstacles increase. If you look into the square in successive moments, you hear how from act to act the dialogue changes, even if the lives of Melania’s inhabitants are too short for them to realize it.





Marco Polo describes a bridge, stone by stone.

“But which is the stone that supports the bridge?” Kublai Khan asks.

“The bridge is not supported by one stone or another,” Marco answers, “but by the line of the arch that they form.”

Kublai Khan remains silent, reflecting. Then he adds: “Why do you speak to me of the stones? It is only the arch that matters to me.”

Polo answers: “Without stones there is no arch.”





6





“Did you ever happen to see a city resembling this one?” Kublai asked Marco Polo, extending his beringed hand from beneath the silken canopy of the imperial barge, to point to the bridges arching over the canals, the princely palaces whose marble doorsteps were immersed in the water, the bustle of light craft zigzagging, driven by long oars, the boats unloading baskets of vegetables at the market squares, the balconies, platforms, domes, campaniles, island gardens glowing green in the lagoon’s grayness.

The emperor, accompanied by his foreign dignitary, was visiting Kin-sai, ancient capital of deposed dynasties, the latest pearl set in the Great Khan’s crown.

“No, sire,” Marco answered, “I should never have imagined a city like this could exist.”

The emperor tried to peer into his eyes. The foreigner lowered his gaze. Kublai remained silent the whole day.

After sunset, on the terraces of the palace, Marco Polo expounded to the sovereign the results of his missions. As a rule the Great Khan concluded his day savoring these tales with half-closed eyes until his first yawn was the signal for the suite of pages to light the flames that guided the monarch to the Pavilion of the August Slumber. But this time Kublai seemed unwilling to give in to weariness. “Tell me another city,” he insisted.

“. . . You leave there and ride for three days between the northeast and east-by-northeast winds . . .” Marco resumed saying, enumerating names and customs and wares of a great number of lands. His repertory could be called inexhaustible, but now he was the one who had to give in. Dawn had broken when he said: “Sire, now I have told you about all the cities I know.”

“There is still one of which you never speak.”

Marco Polo bowed his head.

“Venice,” the Khan said.

Marco smiled. “What else do you believe I have been talking to you about?”

The emperor did not turn a hair. “And yet I have never heard you mention that name.”

And Polo said: “Every time I describe a city I am saying something about Venice.”

“When I ask you about other cities, I want to hear about them. And about Venice, when I ask you about Venice.”

“To distinguish the other cities’ qualities, I must speak of a first city that remains implicit. For me it is Venice.”

“You should then begin each tale of your travels from the departure, describing Venice as it is, all of it, not omitting anything you remember of it. “

The lake’s surface was barely wrinkled; the copper reflection of the ancient palace of the Sung was shattered into sparkling glints like floating leaves.

“Memory’s images, once they are fixed in words, are erased,” Polo said. “Perhaps I am afraid of losing Venice all at once, if I speak of it. Or perhaps, speaking of other cities, I have already lost it, little by little.”





TRADING CITIES • 5

IN ESMERALDA, CITY of water, a network of canals and a network of streets span and intersect each other. To go from one place to another you have always the choice between land and boat: and since the shortest distance between two points in Esmeralda is not a straight line but a zigzag that ramifies in tortuous optional routes, the ways that open to each passer-by are never two, but many, and they increase further for those who alternate a stretch by boat with one on dry land.

And so Esmeralda’s inhabitants are spared the boredom of following the same streets every day. And that is not all: the network of routes is not arranged on one level, but follows instead an up-and-down course of steps, landings, cambered bridges, hanging streets. Combining segments of the various routes, elevated or on ground level, each inhabitant can enjoy every day the pleasure of a new itinerary to reach the same places. The most fixed and calm lives in Esmeralda are spent without any repetition.

Secret and adventurous lives, here as elsewhere, are subject to greater restrictions. Esmeralda’s cats, thieves, illicit lovers move along higher, discontinuous ways, dropping from a rooftop to a balcony, following gutterings with acrobats’ steps. Below, the rats run in the darkness of the sewers, one behind the other’s tail, along with conspirators and smugglers: they peep out of manholes and drainpipes, they slip through double bottoms and ditches, from one hiding place to another they drag crusts of cheese, contraband goods, kegs of gunpowder, crossing the city’s compactness pierced by the spokes of underground passages.

A map of Esmeralda should include, marked in different colored inks, all these routes, solid and liquid, evident and hidden. It is more difficult to fix on the map the routes of the swallows, who cut the air over the roofs, dropping long invisible parabolas with their still wings, darting to gulp a mosquito, spiraling upward, grazing a pinnacle, dominating from every point of their airy paths all the points of the city.





CITIES & EYES • 4

WHEN YOU HAVE arrived at Phyllis, you rejoice in observing all the bridges over the canals, each different from the others: cambered, covered, on pillars, on barges, suspended, with tracery balustrades. And what a variety of windows looks down on the streets: mullioned, Moorish, lancet, pointed, surmounted by lunettes or stained-glass roses; how many kinds of pavement cover the ground: cobbles, slabs, gravel, blue and white tiles. At every point the city offers surprises to your view: a caper bush jutting from the fortress’ walls, the statues of three queens on corbels, an onion dome with three smaller onions threaded on the spire. “Happy the man who has Phyllis before his eyes each day and who never ceases seeing the things it contains,” you cry, with regret at having to leave the city when you can barely graze it with your glance.

But it so happens that, instead, you must stay in Phyllis and spend the rest of your days there. Soon the city fades before your eyes, the rose windows are expunged, the statues on the corbels, the domes. Like all of Phyllis’s inhabitants, you follow zigzag lines from one street to another, you distinguish the patches of sunlight from the patches of shade, a door here, a stairway there, a bench where you can put down your basket, a hole where your foot stumbles if you are not careful. All the rest of the city is invisible. Phyllis is a space in which routes are drawn between points suspended in the void: the shortest way to reach that certain merchant’s tent, avoiding that certain creditor’s window. Your footsteps follow not what is outside the eyes, but what is within, buried, erased. If, of two arcades, one continues to seem more joyous, it is because thirty years ago a girl went by there, with broad, embroidered sleeves, or else it is only because that arcade catches the light at a certain hour like that other arcade, you cannot recall where.

Millions of eyes look up at windows, bridges, capers, and they might be scanning a blank page. Many are the cities like Phyllis, which elude the gaze of all, except the man who catches them by surprise.





CITIES & NAMES • 3

FOR A LONG time Pyrrha to me was a fortified city on the slopes of a bay, with high windows and towers, enclosed like a goblet, with a central square deep as a well, with a well in its center. I had never seen it. It was one of the many cities where I had never arrived, that I conjured up, through its name: Euphrasia, Odile, Margara, Getullia. Pyrrha had its place among them, different from each of them, and like each of them, unmistakable to the mind’s eye.

The day came when my travels took me to Pyrrha. As soon as I set foot there, everything I had imagined was forgotten; Pyrrha had become what is Pyrrha; and I thought I had always known that the sea is invisible from the city, hidden behind a dune of the low, rolling coast; that the streets are long and straight; that the houses are clumped at intervals, not high, and they are separated by open lots with stacks of lumber and with sawmills; that the wind stirs the vanes of the water pumps. From that moment on the name Pyrrha has brought to my mind this view, this light, this buzzing, this air in which a yellowish dust flies: obviously the name means this and could mean nothing but this.

My mind goes on containing a great number of cities I have never seen and will never see, names that bear with them a figure or a fragment or glimmer of an imagined figure: Getullia, Odile, Euphrasia, Margara. The city high above the bay is also there still, with the square enclosing the well, but I can no longer call it by a name, nor remember how I could ever have given it a name that means something entirely different.





CITIES & THE DEAD • 2

NEVER IN ALL my travels had I ventured as far as Adelma. It was dusk when I landed there. On the dock the sailor who caught the rope and tied it to the bollard resembled a man who had soldiered with me and was dead. It was the hour of the wholesale fish market. An old man was loading a basket of sea urchins on a cart; I thought I recognized him; when I turned, he had disappeared down an alley, but I realized that he looked like a fisherman who, already old when I was a child, could no longer be among the living. I was upset by the sight of a fever victim huddled on the ground, a blanket over his head: my father a few days before his death had yellow eyes and a growth of beard like this man. I turned my gaze aside; I no longer dared look anyone in the face.

I thought: “If Adelma is a city I am seeing in a dream, where you encounter only the dead, the dream frightens me. If Adelma is a real city, inhabited by living people, I need only continue looking at them and the resemblances will dissolve, alien faces will appear, bearing anguish. In either case it is best for me not to insist on staring at them.”

A vegetable vendor was weighing a cabbage on a scales and put it in a basket dangling on a string a girl lowered from a balcony. The girl was identical with one in my village who had gone mad for love and killed herself. The vegetable vendor raised her face: she was my grandmother.

I thought: “You reach a moment in life when, among the people you have known, the dead outnumber the living. And the mind refuses to accept more faces, more expressions: on every new face you encounter, it prints the old forms, for each one it finds the most suitable mask.”

The stevedores climbed the steps in a line, bent beneath demijohns and barrels; their faces were hidden by sackcloth hoods; “Now they will straighten up and I will recognize them,” I thought, with impatience and fear. But I could not take my eyes off them; if I turned my gaze just a little toward the crowd that crammed those narrow streets, I was assailed by unexpected faces, reappearing from far away, staring at me as if demanding recognition, as if to recognize me, as if they had already recognized me. Perhaps, for each of them, I also resembled someone who was dead. I had barely arrived at Adelma and I was already one of them, I had gone over to their side, absorbed in that kaleidoscope of eyes, wrinkles, grimaces.

I thought: “Perhaps Adelma is the city where you arrive dying and where each finds again the people he has known. This means I, too, am dead.” And I also thought: “This means the beyond is not happy.”





CITIES & THE SKY • 1

IN EUDOXIA, WHICH spreads both upward and down, with winding alleys, steps, dead ends, hovels, a carpet is preserved in which you can observe the city’s true form. At first sight nothing seems to resemble Eudoxia less than the design of that carpet, laid out in symmetrical motives whose patterns are repeated along straight and circular lines, interwoven with brilliantly colored spires, in a repetition that can be followed throughout the whole woof. But if you pause and examine it carefully, you become convinced that each place in the carpet corresponds to a place in the city and all the things contained in the city are included in the design, arranged according to their true relationship, which escapes your eye distracted by the bustle, the throngs, the shoving. All of Eudoxia’s confusion, the mules’ braying, the lampblack stains, the fish smell is what is evident in the incomplete perspective you grasp; but the carpet proves that there is a point from which the city shows its true proportions, the geometrical scheme implicit in its every, tiniest detail.

It is easy to get lost in Eudoxia: but when you concentrate and stare at the carpet, you recognize the street you were seeking in a crimson or indigo or magenta thread which, in a wide loop, brings you to the purple enclosure that is your real destination. Every inhabitant of Eudoxia compares the carpet’s immobile order with his own image of the city, an anguish of his own, and each can find, concealed among the arabesques, an answer, the story of his life, the twists of fate.

An oracle was questioned about the mysterious bond between two objects so dissimilar as the carpet and the city. One of the two objects – the oracle replied – has the form the gods gave the starry sky and the orbits in which the worlds revolve; the other is an approximate reflection, like every human creation.

For some time the augurs had been sure that the carpet’s harmonious pattern was of divine origin. The oracle was interpreted in this sense, arousing no controversy. But you could, similarly, come to the opposite conclusion: that the true map of the universe is the city of Eudoxia, just as it is, a stain that spreads out shapelessly, with crooked streets, houses that crumble one upon the other amid clouds of dust, fires, screams in the darkness.





“. . . So then, yours is truly a journey through memory!” The Great Khan, his ears always sharp, sat up in his hammock every time he caught the hint of a sigh in Marco’s speech. “It was to slough off a burden of nostalgia that you went so far away!” he exclaimed, or else: “You return from your voyages with a cargo of regrets!” And he added, sarcastically: “Meager purchases, to tell the truth, for a merchant of the Serenissima!”

This was the target of all Kublai’s questions about the past and the future. For an hour he had been toying with it, like a cat with a mouse, and finally he had Marco with his back to the wall, attacking him, putting a knee on his chest, seizing him by the beard: “This is what I wanted to hear from you: confess what you are smuggling: moods, states of grace, elegies!”

These words and actions were perhaps only imagined, as the two, silent and motionless, watched the smoke rise slowly from their pipes. The cloud dissolved at times in a wisp of wind, or else remained suspended in mid-air; and the answer was in that cloud. As the puff carried the smoke away, Marco thought of the mists that cloud the expanse of the sea and the mountain ranges and, when dispelled, leave the air dry and diaphanous, revealing distant cities. It was beyond that screen of fickle humors that his gaze wished to arrive: the form of things can be discerned better at a distance.

Or else the cloud hovered, having barely left the lips, dense and slow, and suggested another vision: the exhalations that hang over the roofs of the metropolises, the opaque smoke that is not scattered, the hood of miasmata that weighs over the bituminous streets. Not the labile mists of memory nor the dry transparence, but the charring of burned lives that forms a scab on the city, the sponge swollen with vital matter that no longer flows, the jam of past, present, future that blocks existences calcified in the illusion of movement: this is what you would find at the end of your journey.





7





KUBLAI: I do not know when you have had time to visit all the countries you describe to me. It seems to me you have never moved from this garden

POLO:Everything I see and do assumes meaning in a mental space where the same calm reigns as here, the same penumbra, the same silence streaked by the rustling of leaves. At the moment when I concentrate and reflect, I find myself again, always, in this garden, at this hour of the evening, in your august presence, though I continue, without a moment’s pause, moving up a river green with crocodiles or counting the barrels of salted fish being lowered into the hold.

KUBLAI: I, too, am not sure I am here, strolling among the porphyry fountains, listening to the plashing echo, and not riding, caked with sweat and blood, at the head of my army, conquering the lands you will have to describe, or cutting off the fingers of the attackers scaling the walls of a besieged fortress.

POLO: Perhaps this garden exists only in the shadow of our lowered eyelids, and we have never stopped: you, from raising dust on the fields of battle; and I, from bargaining for sacks of pepper in distant bazaars. But each time we half-close our eyes, in the midst of the din and the throng, we are allowed to withdraw here, dressed in silk kimonos, to ponder what we are seeing and living, to draw conclusions, to contemplate from the distance.

KUBLAI: Perhaps this dialogue of ours is taking place between two beggars nicknamed Kublai Khan and Marco Polo; as they sift through a rubbish heap, piling up rusted flotsam, scraps of cloth, wastepaper, while drunk on the few sips of bad wine, they see all the treasure of the East shine around them.

POLO: Perhaps all that is left of the world is a wasteland covered with rubbish heaps, and the hanging garden of the Great Khan’s palace. It is our eyelids that separate them, but we cannot know which is inside and which outside.





CITIES & EYES • 5

WHEN YOU HAVE forded the river, when you have crossed the mountain pass, you suddenly find before you the city of Moriana, its alabaster gates transparent in the sunlight, its coral columns supporting pediments encrusted with serpentine, its villas all of glass like aquariums where the shadows of dancing girls with silvery scales swim beneath the medusa-shaped chandeliers. If this is not your first journey, you already know that cities like this have an obverse: you have only to walk in a semicircle and you will come into view of Moriana’s hidden face, an expanse of rusting sheet metal, sackcloth, planks bristling with spikes, pipes black with soot, piles of tins, blind walls with fading signs, frames of staved-in straw chairs, ropes good only for hanging oneself from a rotten beam.

From one part to the other, the city seems to continue, in perspective, multiplying its repertory of images: but instead it has no thickness, it consists only of a face and an obverse, like a sheet of paper, with a figure on either side, which can neither be separated nor look at each other.





CITIES & NAMES • 4

CLARICE, THE GLORIOUS city, has a tormented history. Several times it decayed, then burgeoned again, always keeping the first Clarice as an unparalleled model of every splendor, compared to which the city’s present state can only cause more sighs at every fading of the stars.

In its centuries of decadence, emptied by plagues, its height reduced by collapsing beams and cornices and by shifts of the terrain, rusted and stopped up through neglect or the lack of maintenance men, the city slowly became populated again as the survivors emerged from the basements and lairs, in hordes, swarming like rats, driven by their fury to rummage and gnaw, and yet also to collect and patch, like nesting birds. They grabbed everything that could be taken from where it was and put it in another place to serve a different use: brocade curtains ended up as sheets; in marble funerary urns they planted basil; wrought-iron gratings torn from the harem windows were used for roasting cat-meat on fires of inlaid wood. Put together with odd bits of the useless Clarice, a survivors’ Clarice was taking shape, all huts and hovels, festering sewers, rabbit cages. And yet, almost nothing was lost of Clarice’s former splendor; it was all there, merely arranged in a different order, no less appropriate to the inhabitants’ needs than it had been before.

The days of poverty were followed by more joyous times: a sumptuous butterfly-Clarice emerged from the beggared chrysalis-Clarice. The new abundance made the city overflow with new materials, buildings, objects; new people flocked in from outside; nothing, no one had any connection with the former Clarice, or Clarices. And the more the new city settled triumphantly into the place and the name of the first Clarice, the more it realized it was moving away from it, destroying it no less rapidly than the rats and the mold. Despite its pride in its new wealth, the city, at heart, felt itself incongruous, alien, a usurper.

And then the shards of the original splendor that had been saved, by adapting them to more obscure needs, were again shifted. They were now preserved under glass bells, locked in display cases, set on velvet cushions, and not because they might still be used for anything, but because people wanted to reconstruct through them a city of which no one knew anything now.

More decadences, more burgeonings have followed one another in Clarice. Populations and customs have changed several times; the name, the site, and the objects hardest to break remain. Each new Clarice, compact as a living body with its smells and its breath, shows off, like a gem, what remains of the ancient Clarices, fragmentary and dead. There is no knowing when the Corinthian capitals stood on the top of their columns: only one of them is remembered, since for many years, in a chicken run, it supported the basket where the hens laid their eggs, and from there it was moved to the Museum of Capitals, in line with other specimens of the collection. The order of the eras’ succession has been lost; that a first Clarice existed is a widespread belief, but there are no proofs to support it. The capitals could have been in the chicken runs before they were in the temples, the marble urns could have been planted with basil before they were filled with dead bones. Only this is known for sure: a given number of objects is shifted within a given space, at times submerged by a quantity of new objects, at times worn out and not replaced; the rule is to shuffle them each time, then try to assemble them. Perhaps Clarice has always been only a confusion of chipped gimcracks, ill-assorted, obsolete.





CITIES & THE DEAD • 3

No city is more inclined than Eusapia to enjoy life and flee care. And to make the leap from life to death less abrupt, the inhabitants have constructed an identical copy of their city, underground. All corpses, dried in such a way that the skeleton remains sheathed in yellow skin, are carried down there, to continue their former activities. And, of these activities, it is their carefree moments that take first place: most of the corpses are seated around laden tables, or placed in dancing positions, or made to play little trumpets. But all the trades and professions of the living Eusapia are also at work below ground, or at least those that the living performed with more contentment than irritation: the clockmaker, amid all the stopped clocks of his shop, places his parchment ear against an out-of-tune grandfather clock; a barber, with dry brush, lathers the cheekbones of an actor learning his role, studying the script with hollow sockets; a girl with a laughing skull milks the carcass of a heifer.

To be sure, many of the living want a fate after death different from their lot in life: the necropolis is crowded with big-game hunters, mezzosopranos, bankers, violinists, duchesses, courtesans, generals – more than the living city ever contained.

The job of accompanying the dead down below and arranging them in the desired place is assigned to a confraternity of hooded brothers. No one else has access to the Eusapia of the dead and everything known about it has been learned from them.

They say that the same confraternity exists among the dead and that it never fails to lend a hand; the hooded brothers, after death, will perform the same job in the other Eusapia; rumor has it that some of them are already dead but continue going up and down. In any case, this confraternity’s authority in the Eusapia of the living is vast.

They say that every time they go below they find something changed in the lower Eusapia; the dead make innovations in their city; not many, but surely the fruit of sober reflection, not passing whims. From one year to the next, they say, the Eusapia of the dead becomes unrecognizable. And the living, to keep up with them, also want to do everything that the hooded brothers tell them about the novelties of the dead. So the Eusapia of the living has taken to copying its underground copy.

They say that this has not just now begun to happen: actually it was the dead who built the upper Eusapia, in the image of their city. They say that in the twin cities there is no longer any way of knowing who is alive and who is dead.





CITIES & THE SKY • 2

THIS BELIEF IS handed down in Beersheba: that, suspended in the heavens, there exists another Beersheba, where the city’s most elevated virtues and sentiments are poised, and that if the terrestrial Beersheba will take the celestial one as its model the two cities will become one. The image propagated by tradition is that of a city of pure gold, with silver locks and diamond gates, a jewel-city, all inset and inlaid, as a maximum of laborious study might produce when applied to materials of the maximum worth. True to this belief, Beersheba’s inhabitants honor everything that suggests for them the celestial city: they accumulate noble metals and rare stones, they renounce all ephemeral excesses, they develop forms of composite composure.

They also believe, these inhabitants, that another Beersheba exists underground, the receptacle of everything base and unworthy that happens to them, and it is their constant care to erase from the visible Beersheba every tie or resemblance to the lower twin. In the place of roofs they imagine that the underground city has overturned rubbish bins, with cheese rinds, greasy paper, fish scales, dishwater, uneaten spaghetti, old bandages spilling from them. Or even that its substance is dark and malleable and thick, like the pitch that pours down from the sewers, prolonging the route of the human bowels, from black hole to black hole, until it splatters against the lowest subterranean floor, and from the lazy, encircled bubbles below, layer upon layer, a fecal city rises, with twisted spires.

In Beersheba’s beliefs there is an element of truth and one of error. It is true that the city is accompanied by two projections of itself, one celestial and one infernal; but the citizens are mistaken about their consistency. The inferno that broods in the deepest subsoil of Beersheba is a city designed by the most authoritative architects, built with the most expensive materials on the market, with every device and mechanism and gear system functioning, decked with tassels and fringes and frills hanging from all the pipes and levers.

Intent on piling up its carats of perfection, Beersheba takes for virtue what is now a grim mania to fill the empty vessel of itself; the city does not know that its only moments of generous abandon are those when it becomes detached from itself, when it lets go, expands. Still, at the zenith of Beersheba there gravitates a celestial body that shines with all the city’s riches, enclosed in the treasury of cast-off things: a planet aflutter with potato peels, broken umbrellas, old socks, candy wrappings, paved with tram tickets, fingernail-cuttings and pared calluses, eggshells. This is the celestial city, and in its heavens long-tailed comets fly past, released to rotate in space from the only free and happy action of the citizens of Beersheba, a city which, only when it shits, is not miserly, calculating, greedy.





CONTINUOUS CITIES • 1

THE CITY OF Leonia refashions itself every day: every morning the people wake between fresh sheets, wash with just-unwrapped cakes of soap, wear brand-new clothing, take from the latest model refrigerator still unopened tins, listening to the last-minute jingles from the most up-to-date radio.

On the sidewalks, encased in spotless plastic bags, the remains of yesterday’s Leonia await the garbage truck. Not only squeezed tubes of toothpaste, blown-out light bulbs, newspapers, containers, wrappings, but also boilers, encyclopedias, pianos, porcelain dinner services. It is not so much by the things that each day are manufactured, sold, bought that you can measure Leonia’s opulence, but rather by the things that each day are thrown out to make room for the new. So you begin to wonder if Leonia’s true passion is really, as they say, the enjoyment of new and different things, and not, instead, the joy of expelling, discarding, cleansing itself of a recurrent impurity. The fact is that street cleaners are welcomed like angels, and their task of removing the residue of yesterday’s existence is surrounded by a respectful silence, like a ritual that inspires devotion, perhaps only because once things have been cast off nobody wants to have to think about them further.

Nobody wonders where, each day, they carry their load of refuse. Outside the city, surely; but each year the city expands, and the street cleaners have to fall farther back. The bulk of the outflow increases and the piles rise higher, become stratified, extend over a wider perimeter. Besides, the more Leonia’s talent for making new materials excels, the more the rubbish improves in quality, resists time, the elements, fermentations, combustions. A fortress of indestructible leftovers surrounds Leonia, dominating it on every side, like a chain of mountains.

This is the result: the more Leonia expels goods, the more it accumulates them; the scales of its past are soldered into a cuirass that cannot be removed. As the city is renewed each day, it preserves all of itself in its only definitive form: yesterday’s sweepings piled up on the sweepings of the day before yesterday and of all its days and years and decades.

Leonia’s rubbish little by little would invade the world, if, from beyond the final crest of its boundless rubbish heap, the street cleaners of other cities were not pressing, also pushing mountains of refuse in front of themselves. Perhaps the whole world, beyond Leonia’s boundaries, is covered by craters of rubbish, each surrounding a metropolis in constant eruption. The boundaries between the alien, hostile cities are infected ramparts where the detritus of both support each other, overlap, mingle.

The greater its height grows, the more the danger of a landslide looms: a tin can, an old tire, an unraveled wine flask, if it rolls toward Leonia, is enough to bring with it an avalanche of unmated shoes, calendars of bygone years, withered flowers, submerging the city in its own past, which it had tried in vain to reject, mingling with the past of the neighboring cities, finally clean. A cataclysm will flatten the sordid mountain range, canceling every trace of the metropolis always dressed in new clothes. In the nearby cities they are all ready, waiting with bulldozers to flatten the terrain, to push into the new territory, expand, and drive the new street cleaners still farther out.





POLO: . . . Perhaps the terraces of this garden overlook only the lake of our mind. . . .

KUBLAI: . . . and however far our troubled enterprises as warriors and merchants may take us, we both harbor within ourselves this silent shade, this conversation of pauses, this evening that is always the same.

POLO: Unless the opposite hypothesis is correct: that those who strive in camps and ports exist only because we two think of them, here, enclosed among these bamboo hedges, motionless since time began.

KUBLAI: Unless toil, shouts, sores, stink do not exist; and only this azalea bush.

POLO: Unless porters, stonecutters, rubbish collectors, cooks cleaning the lights of chickens, washerwomen bent over stones, mothers stirring rice as they nurse their infants, exist only because we think them.

KUBLAI: To tell the truth, I never think them.

POLO: Then they do not exist.

KUBLAI: To me this conjecture does not seem to suit our purposes. Without them we could never remain here swaying, cocooned in our hammocks.

POLO: Then the hypothesis must be rejected. So the other hypothesis is true: they exist and we do not.

KUBLAI: We have proved that if we were here, we would not be.

POLO: And here, in fact, we are.





8





From the foot of the Great Khan’s throne a majolica pavement extended. Marco Polo, mute informant, spread out on it the samples of the wares he had brought back from his journeys to the ends of the empire: a helmet, a seashell, a coconut, a fan. Arranging the objects in a certain order on the black and white tiles, and occasionally shifting them with studied moves, the ambassador tried to depict for the monarch’s eyes the vicissitudes of his travels, the conditions of the empire, the prerogatives of the distant provincial seats.

Kublai was a keen chess player; following Marco’s movements, he observed that certain pieces implied or excluded the vicinity of other pieces and were shifted along certain lines. Ignoring the objects’ variety of form, he could grasp the system of arranging one with respect to the others on the majolica floor. He thought: “If each city is like a game of chess, the day when I have learned the rules, I shall finally possess my empire, even if I shall never succeed in knowing all the cities it contains.”

Actually, it was useless for Marco’s speeches to employ all this bric-a-brac: a chessboard would have sufficed, with its specific pieces. To each piece, in turn, they could give an appropriate meaning: a knight could stand for a real horseman, or for a procession of coaches, an army on the march, an equestrian monument: a queen could be a lady looking down from her balcony, a fountain, a church with a pointed dome, a quince tree.

Returning from his last mission, Marco Polo found the Khan awaiting him, seated at a chessboard. With a gesture he invited the Venetian to sit opposite him and describe, with the help only of the chessmen, the cities he had visited. Marco did not lose heart. The Great Khan’s chessmen were huge pieces of polished ivory: arranging on the board looming rooks and sulky knights, assembling swarms of pawns, drawing straight or oblique avenues like a queen’s progress, Marco recreated the perspectives and the spaces of black and white cities on moonlit nights.

Contemplating these essential landscapes, Kublai reflected on the invisible order that sustains cities, on the rules that decreed how they rise, take shape and prosper, adapting themselves to the seasons, and then how they sadden and fall in ruins. At times he thought he was on the verge of discovering a coherent, harmonious system underlying the infinite deformities and discords, but no model could stand up to the comparison with the game of chess. Perhaps, instead of racking one’s brain to suggest with the ivory pieces’ scant help visions which were anyway destined to oblivion, it would suffice to play a game according to the rules, and to consider each successive state of the board as one of the countless forms that the system of forms assembles and destroys.

Now Kublai Khan no longer had to send Marco Polo on distant expeditions: he kept him playing endless games of chess. Knowledge of the empire was hidden in the pattern drawn by the angular shifts of the knight, by the diagonal, passages opened by the bishop’s incursions, by the lumbering, cautious tread of the king and the humble pawn, by the inexorable ups and downs of every game.

The Great Khan tried to concentrate on the game: but now it was the game’s purpose that eluded him. Each game ends in a gain or a loss: but of what? What were the true stakes? At checkmate, beneath the foot of the king, knocked aside by the winner’s hand, a black or a white square remains. By disembodying his conquests to reduce them to the essential, Kublai had arrived at the extreme operation: the definitive conquest, of which the empire’s multiform treasures were only illusory envelopes. It was reduced to a square of planed wood: nothingness. . . .





CITIES & NAMES • 5

IRENE IS THE CITY visible when you lean out from the edge of the plateau at the hour when the lights come on, and in the limpid air, the pink of the settlement can be discerned spread out in the distance below: where the windows are more concentrated, where it thins out in dimly lighted alleys, where it collects the shadows of gardens, where it raises towers with signal fires; and if the evening is misty, a hazy glow swells like a milky sponge at the foot of the gulleys.

Travelers on the plateau, shepherds shifting their flocks, bird-catchers watching their nets, hermits gathering greens: all look down and speak of Irene. At times the wind brings a music of bass drums and trumpets, the bang of firecrackers in the light-display of a festival; at times the rattle of guns, the explosion of a powder magazine in the sky yellow with the fires of civil war. Those who look down from the heights conjecture about what is happening in the city; they wonder if it would be pleasant or unpleasant to be in Irene that evening. Not that they have any intention of going there (in any case the roads winding down to the valley are bad), but Irene is a magnet for the eyes and thoughts of those who stay up above.

At this point Kublai Khan expects Marco to speak of Irene as it is seen from within. But Marco cannot do this: he has not succeeded in discovering which is the city that those of the plateau call Irene. For that matter, it is of slight importance: if you saw it, standing in its midst, it would be a different city; Irene is a name for a city in the distance, and if you approach, it changes.

For those who pass it without entering, the city is one thing; it is another for those who are trapped by it and never leave. There is the city where you arrive for the first time; and there is another city which you leave never to return. Each deserves a different name; perhaps I have already spoken of Irene under other names; perhaps I have spoken only of Irene.





CITIES & THE DEAD • 4

WHAT MAKES ARGIA different from other cities is that it has earth instead of air. The streets are completely filled with dirt, clay packs the rooms to the ceiling, on every stair another stairway is set in negative, over the roofs of the houses hang layers of rocky terrain like skies with clouds. We do not know if the inhabitants can move about the city, widening the worm tunnels and the crevices where roots twist: the dampness destroys people’s bodies and they have scant strength; everyone is better off remaining still, prone; anyway, it is dark.

From up here, nothing of Argia can be seen; some say, “It’s down below there,” and we can only believe them. The place is deserted. At night, putting your ear to the ground, you can sometimes hear a door slam.





CITIES & THE SKY • 3

THOSE WHO ARRIVE at Thekla can see little of the city, beyond the plank fences, the sackcloth screens, the scaffoldings, the metal armatures, the wooden catwalks hanging from ropes or supported by sawhorses, the ladders, the trestles. If you ask, “Why is Thekla’s construction taking such a long time?” the inhabitants continue hoisting sacks, lowering leaded strings, moving long brushes up and down, as they answer, “So that its destruction cannot begin.” And if asked whether they fear that, once the scaffoldings are removed, the city may begin to crumble and fall to pieces, they add hastily, in a whisper, “Not only the city.”

If, dissatisfied with the answers, someone puts his eye to a crack in a fence, he sees cranes pulling up other cranes, scaffoldings that embrace other scaffoldings, beams that prop up other beams. “What meaning does your construction have?” he asks. “What is the aim of a city under construction unless it is a city? Where is the plan you are following, the blueprint?”

“We will show it to you as soon as the working day is over; we cannot interrupt our work now,” they answer.

Work stops at sunset. Darkness falls over the building site. The sky is filled with stars. “There is the blueprint,” they say.





CONTINUOUS CITIES • 2

IF ON ARRIVING at Trude I had not read the city’s name written in big letters, I would have thought I was landing at the same airport from which I had taken off. The suburbs they drove me through were no different from the others, with the same little greenish and yellowish houses. Following the same signs we swung around the same flower beds in the same squares. The downtown streets displayed goods, packages, signs that had not changed at all. This was the first time I had come to Trude, but I already knew the hotel where I happened to be lodged; I had already heard and spoken my dialogues with the buyers and sellers of hardware; I had ended other days identically, looking through the same goblets at the same swaying navels.

Why come to Trude? I asked myself. And I already wanted to leave.

“You can resume your flight whenever you like,” they said to me, “but you will arrive at another Trude, absolutely the same, detail by detail. The world is covered by a sole Trude which does not begin and does not end. Only the name of the airport changes.”





HIDDEN CITIES • 1

IN OLINDA, IF you go out with a magnifying glass and hunt carefully, you may find somewhere a point no bigger than the head of a pin which, if you look at it slightly enlarged, reveals within itself the roofs, the antennas, the skylights, the gardens, the pools, the streamers across the streets, the kiosks in the squares, the horse-racing track. That point does not remain there: a year later you will find it the size of half a lemon, then as large as a mushroom, then a soup plate. And then it becomes a full-size city, enclosed within the earlier city: a new city that forces its way ahead in the earlier city and presses it toward the outside.

Olinda is certainly not the only city that grows in concentric circles, like tree trunks which each year add one more ring. But in other cities there remains, in the center, the old narrow girdle of the walls from which the withered spires rise, the towers, the tiled roofs, the domes, while the new quarters sprawl around them like a loosened belt. Not Olinda: the old walls expand bearing the old quarters with them, enlarged, but maintaining their proportions on a broader horizon at the edges of the city; they surround the slightly newer quarters, which also grew up on the margins and became thinner to make room for still more recent ones pressing from inside; and so, on and on, to the heart of the city, a totally new Olinda which, in its reduced dimensions retains the features and the flow of lymph of the first Olinda and of all the Olindas that have blossomed one from the other; and within this innermost circle there are already blossoming – though it is hard to discern them – the next Olinda and those that will grow after it.





. . . The Great Khan tried to concentrate on the game: but now it was the game’s reason that eluded him. The end of every game is a gain or a loss: but of what? What were the real stakes? At checkmate, beneath the foot of the king, knocked aside by the winner’s hand, nothingness remains: a black square, or a white one. By disembodying his conquests to reduce them to the essential, Kublai had arrived at the extreme operation: the definitive conquest, of which the empire’s multiform treasures were only illusory envelopes; it was reduced to a square of planed wood.

Then Marco Polo spoke: “Your chessboard, sire, is inlaid with two woods: ebony and maple. The square on which your enlightened gaze is fixed was cut from the ring of a trunk that grew in a year of drought: you see how its fibers are arranged? Here a barely hinted knot can be made out: a bud tried to burgeon on a premature spring day, but the night’s frost forced it to desist.”

Until then the Great Khan had not realized that the foreigner knew how to express himself fluently in his language, but it was not this fluency that amazed him.

“Here is a thicker pore: perhaps it was a larvum’s nest; not a woodworm, because, once born, it would have begun to dig, but a caterpillar that gnawed the leaves and was the cause of the tree’s being chosen for chopping down . . . This edge was scored by the wood carver with his gouge so that it would adhere to the next square, more protruding. . . . ”

The quantity of things that could be read in a little piece of smooth and empty wood overwhelmed Kublai; Polo was already talking about ebony forests, about rafts laden with logs that come down the rivers, of docks, of women at the windows. . . .





9





The Great Khan owns an atlas where all the cities of the empire and the neighboring realms are drawn, building by building and street by street, with walls, rivers, bridges, harbors, cliffs. He realizes that from Marco Polo’s tales it is pointless to expect news of those places, which for that matter he knows well: how at Kambalu, capital of China, three square cities stand one within the other, each with four temples and four gates that are opened according to the seasons; how on the island of Java the rhinoceros rages, charging, with his murderous horn; how pearls are gathered on the ocean bed off the coasts of Malabar.

Kublai asks Marco, “When you return to the West, will you repeat to your people the same tales you tell me?”

“I speak and speak,” Marco says, “but the listener retains only the words he is expecting. The description of the world to which you lend a benevolent ear is one thing; the description that will go the rounds of the groups of stevedores and gondoliers on the street outside my house the day of my return is another; and yet another, that which I might dictate late in life, if I were taken prisoner by Genoese pirates and put in irons in the same cell with a writer of adventure stories. It is not the voice that commands the story: it is the ear.

“At times I feel your voice is reaching me from far away, while I am prisoner of a gaudy and unlivable present, where all forms of human society have reached an extreme of their cycle and there is no imagining what new forms they may assume. And I hear, from your voice, the invisible reasons which make cities live, through which perhaps, once dead, they will come to life again.”

The Great Khan owns an atlas whose drawings depict the terrestrial globe all at once and continent by continent, the borders of the most distant realms, the ships’ routes, the coastlines, the maps of the most illustrious metropolises and of the most opulent ports. He leafs through the maps before Marco Polo’s eyes to put his knowledge to the test. The traveler recognizes Constantinople in the city which from three shores dominates a long strait, a narrow gulf, and an enclosed sea; he remembers that Jerusalem is set on two hills, of unequal height, facing each other; he has no hesitation in pointing to Samarkand and its gardens.

For other cities he falls back on descriptions handed down by word of mouth, or he guesses on the basis of scant indications: and so Granada, the streaked pearl of the caliphs; Lübeck, the neat, boreal port; Timbuktu, black with ebony and white with ivory; Paris, where millions of men come home every day grasping a wand of bread. In colored miniatures the atlas depicts inhabited places of unusual form: an oasis hidden in a fold of the desert from which only palm crests peer out is surely Nefta; a castle amid quicksands and cows grazing in meadows salted by the tides can only suggest Mont-Saint-Michel; and a palace that instead of rising within a city’s walls contains within its own walls a city can only be Urbino.

The atlas depicts cities which neither Marco nor the geographers know exist or where they are, though they cannot be missing among the forms of possible cities: a Cuzco on a radial and multipartite plan which reflects the perfect order of its trade, a verdant Mexico on the lake dominated by Montezuma’s palace, a Novgorod with bulb-shaped domes, a Lhassa whose white roofs rise over the cloudy roof of the world. For these, too, Marco says a name, no matter which, and suggests a route to reach them. It is known that names of places change as many times as there are foreign languages; and that every place can be reached from other places, by the most various roads and routes, by those who ride, or drive, or row, or fly.

“I think you recognize cities better on the atlas than when you visit them in person,” the emperor says to Marco, snapping the volume shut.

And Polo answers, ‘Traveling, you realize that differences are lost: each city takes to resembling all cities, places exchange their form, order, distances, a shapeless dust cloud invades the continents. Your atlas preserves the differences intact: that assortment of qualities which are like the letters in a name.”

The Great Khan owns an atlas in which are gathered the maps of all the cities: those whose walls rest on solid foundations, those which fell in ruins and were swallowed up by the sand, those that will exist one day and in whose place now only hares’ holes gape.

Marco Polo leafs through the pages; he recognizes Jericho, Ur, Carthage, he points to the landing at the mouth of the Scamander where the Achaean ships waited for ten years to take the besiegers back on board, until the horse nailed together by Ulysses was dragged by windlasses through the Scaean gates. But speaking of Troy, he happened to give the city the form of Constantinople and foresee the siege which Mohammed would lay for long months until, astute as Ulysses, he had his ships drawn at night up the streams from the Bosporus to the Golden Horn, skirting Pera and Galata. And from the mixture of those two cities a third emerged, which might be called San Francisco and which spans the Golden Gate and the bay with long, light bridges and sends open trams climbing its steep streets, and which might blossom as capital of the Pacific a millennium hence, after the long siege of three hundred years that would lead the races of the yellow and the black and the red to fuse with the surviving descendants of the whites in an empire more vast than the Great Khan’s.

The atlas has these qualities: it reveals the form of cities that do not yet have a form or a name. There is the city in the shape of Amsterdam, a semicircle facing north, with concentric canals – the princes’, the emperor’s, the nobles’; there is the city in the shape of York, set among the high moors, walled, bristling with towers; there is the city in the shape of New Amsterdam known also as New York, crammed with towers of glass and steel on an oblong island between two rivers, with streets like deep canals, all of them straight, except Broadway.

The catalogue of forms is endless: until every shape has found its city, new cities will continue to be born. When the forms exhaust their variety and come apart, the end of cities begins. In the last pages of the atlas there is an outpouring of networks without beginning or end, cities in the shape of Los Angeles, in the shape of Kyōto-Ōsaka, without shape.





CITIES & THE DEAD • 5

LIKE LAUDOMIA, EVERY city has at its side another city whose inhabitants are called by the same names: it is the Laudomia of the dead, the cemetery. But Laudomia’s special faculty is that of being not only double, but triple; it comprehends, in short, a third Laudomia, the city of the unborn.

The properties of the double city are well known. The more the Laudomia of the living becomes crowded and expanded, the more the expanse of tombs increases beyond the walls. The streets of the Laudomia of the dead are just wide enough to allow the gravedigger’s cart to pass, and many windowless buildings look out on them; but the pattern of the streets and the arrangement of the dwellings repeat those of the living Laudomia, and in both, families are more and more crowded together, in compartments crammed one above the other. On fine afternoons the living population pays a visit to the dead and they decipher their own names on their stone slabs: like the city of the living, this other city communicates a history of toil, anger, illusions, emotions; only here all has become necessary, divorced from chance, categorized, set in order. And to feel sure of itself, the living Laudomia has to seek in the Laudomia of the dead the explanation of itself, even at the risk of finding more there, or less: explanations for more than one Laudomia, for different cities that could have been and were not, or reasons that are incomplete, contradictory, disappointing.

Rightly, Laudomia assigns an equally vast residence to those who are still to be born. Naturally the space is not in proportion to their number, which is presumably infinite, but since the area is empty, surrounded by an architecture all niches and bays and grooves, and since the unborn can be imagined of any size, big as mice or silkworms or ants or ants’ eggs, there is nothing against imagining them erect or crouching on every object or bracket that juts from the walls, on every capital or plinth, lined up or dispersed, intent on the concerns of their future life, and so you can contemplate in a marble vein all Laudomia of a hundred or a thousand years hence, crowded with multitudes in clothing never seen before, all in eggplant-colored barracans, for example, or with turkey feathers on their turbans, and you can recognize your own descendants and those of other families, friendly or hostile, of debtors and creditors, continuing their affairs, revenges, marrying for love or for money. The living of Laudomia frequent the house of the unborn to interrogate them: footsteps echo beneath the hollow domes; the questions are asked in silence; and it is always about themselves that the living ask, not about those who are to come. One man is concerned with leaving behind him an illustrious reputation, another wants his shame to be forgotten; all would like to follow the thread of their own actions’ consequences; but the more they sharpen their eyes, the less they can discern a continuous line; the future inhabitants of Laudomia seem like dots, grains of dust, detached from any before or after.

The Laudomia of the unborn does not transmit, like the city of the dead, any sense of security to the inhabitants of the living Laudomia: only alarm. In the end, the visitors’ thoughts find two paths open before them, and there is no telling which harbors more anguish: either you must think that the number of the unborn is far greater than the total of all the living and all the dead, and then in every pore of the stone there are invisible hordes, jammed on the funnel-sides as in the stands of a stadium, and since with each generation Laudomia’s descendants are multiplied, every funnel contains hundreds of other funnels each with millions of persons who are to be born, thrusting their necks out and opening their mouths to escape suffocation. Or else you think that Laudomia, too, will disappear, no telling when, and all its citizens with it; in other words the generations will follow one another until they reach a certain number and will then go no further. Then the Laudomia of the dead and that of the unborn are like the two bulbs of an hourglass which is not turned over; each passage between birth and death is a grain of sand that passes the neck, and there will be a last inhabitant of Laudomia born, a last grain to fall, which is now at the top of the pile, waiting.





CITIES & THE SKY • 4

SUMMONED TO LAY down the rules for the foundation of Perinthia, the astronomers established the place and the day according to the position of the stars; they drew the intersecting lines of the decumanus and the cardo, the first oriented to the passage of the sun and the other like the axis on which the heavens turn. They divided the map according to the twelve houses of the zodiac so that each temple and each neighborhood would receive the proper influence of the favoring constellations; they fixed the point in the walls where gates should be cut, foreseeing how each would frame an eclipse of the moon in the next thousand years. Perinthia _ they guaranteed – would reflect the harmony of the firmament; nature’s reason and the gods’ benevolence would shape the inhabitants’ destinies.

Following the astronomers’ calculations precisely, Perinthia was constructed; various peoples came to populate it; the first generation born in Perinthia began to grow within its walls; and these citizens reached the age to marry and have children.

In Perinthia’s streets and square today you encounter cripples, dwarfs, hunchbacks, obese men, bearded women. But the worse cannot be seen; guttural howls are heard from cellars and lofts, where families hide children with three heads or with six legs.

Perinthia’s astronomers are faced with a difficult choice. Either they must admit that all their calculations were wrong and their figures are unable to describe the heavens, or else they must reveal that the order of the gods is reflected exactly in the city of monsters.





CONTINUOUS CITIES • 3

Each year in the course of my travels I stop at Procopia and take lodgings in the same room in the same inn. Ever since the first time I have lingered to contemplate the landscape to be seen by raising the curtain at the window: a ditch, a bridge, a little wall, a medlar, a field of corn, a bramble patch with blackberries, a chicken yard, the yellow hump of a hill, a white cloud, a stretch of blue sky shaped like a trapeze. The first time I am sure there was no one to be seen; it was only the following year that, at a movement among the leaves, I could discern a round, flat face, gnawing on an ear of corn. A year later there were three of them on the wall, and at my return I saw six, seated in a row, with their hands on their knees and some medlars in a dish. Each year, as soon as I entered the room, I raised the curtain and counted more faces: sixteen, including those down in the ditch; twenty-nine, of whom eight were perched in the medlar; forty-seven, besides those in the chicken house. They look alike, they seem polite, they have freckles on their cheeks, they smile, some have lips stained by blackberries. Soon I saw the whole bridge filled with round-faced characters, huddled, because they had no more room to move in; they chomped the kernels of corn, then they gnawed on the ears.

And so, as year followed year, I saw the ditch vanish, the tree, the bramble patch, hidden by hedges of calm smiles, between round cheeks, moving, chewing leaves. You have no idea how many people can be contained in a confined space like that little field of corn, especially when they are seated, hugging their knees, motionless. They must have been many more than they seemed: I saw the hump of the hill become covered with a thicker and thicker crowd; but now that the ones on the bridge have got into the habit of straddling one another’s shoulders, my gaze can no longer reach that far.

This year, finally, as I raise the curtain, the window frames only an expanse of faces: from one corner to the other, at all levels and all distances, those round, motionless, entirely flat faces are seen, with a hint of a smile, and in their midst, many hands, grasping the shoulders of those in front. Even the sky has disappeared. I might as well leave the window.

Not that it is easy for me to move. There are twenty-six of us lodged in my room: to shift my feet I have to disturb those crouching on the floor. I force my way among the knees of those seated on the chest of drawers and the elbows of those taking turns leaning on the bed: all very polite people, luckily.





HIDDEN CITIES • 2

IN RAISSA, LIFE is not happy. People wring their hands as they walk in the streets, curse the crying children, lean on the railings over the river and press their fists to their temples. In the morning you wake from one bad dream and another begins. At the workbenches where, every moment, you hit your finger with a hammer or prick it with a needle, or over the columns of figures all awry in the ledgers of merchants and bankers, or at the rows of empty glasses on the zinc counters of the wineshops, the bent heads at least conceal the general grim gaze. Inside the houses it is worse, and you do not have to enter to learn this: in the summer the windows resound with quarrels and broken dishes.

And yet, in Raissa, at every moment there is a child in a window who laughs seeing a dog that has jumped on a shed to bite into a piece of polenta dropped by a stonemason who has shouted from the top of the scaffolding, “Darling, let me dip into it,” to a young serving-maid who holds up a dish of ragout under the pergola, happy to serve it to the umbrella-maker who is celebrating a successful transaction, a white lace parasol bought to display at the races by a great lady in love with an officer who has smiled at her taking the last jump, happy man, and still happier his horse, flying over the obstacles, seeing a francolin flying in the sky, happy bird freed from its cage by a painter happy at having painted it feather by feather, speckled with red and yellow in the illumination of that page in the volume where the philosopher says: “Also in Raissa, city of sadness, there runs an invisible thread that binds one living being to another for a moment, then unravels, then is stretched again between moving points as it draws new and rapid patterns so that at every second the unhappy city contains a happy city unaware of its own existence.”





CITIES & THE SKY • 5

ANDRIA WAS BUILT so artfully that its every street follows a planet’s orbit, and the buildings and the places of community life repeat the order of the constellations and the position of the most luminous stars: Antares, Alpheratz, Capricorn, the Cepheids. The city’s calendar is so regulated that jobs and offices and ceremonies are arranged in a map corresponding to the firmament on that date: and thus the days on earth and the nights in the sky reflect each other.

Though it is painstakingly regimented, the city’s life flows calmly like the motion of the celestial bodies and it acquires the inevitability of phenomena not subject to human caprice. In praising Andria’s citizens for their productive industry and their spiritual ease, I was led to say: I can well understand how you, feeling yourselves part of an unchanging heaven, cogs in a meticulous clockwork, take care not to make the slightest change in your city and your habits. Andria is the only city I know where it is best to remain motionless in time.

They looked at one another dumbfounded. “But why? Whoever said such a thing?” And they led me to visit a suspended street recently opened over a bamboo grove, a shadow-theater under construction in the place of the municipal kennels, now moved to the pavilions of the former lazaretto, abolished when the last plague victims were cured, and – just inaugurated – a river port, a statue of Thales, a toboggan slide.

“And these innovations do not disturb your city’s astral rhythm?” I asked.

“Our city and the sky correspond so perfectly,” they answered, “that any change in Andria involves some novelty among the stars.” The astronomers, after each change takes place in Andria, peer into their telescopes and report a nova’s explosion, or a remote point in the firmament’s change of color from orange to yellow, the expansion of a nebula, the bending of a spiral of the Milky Way. Each change implies a sequence of other changes, in Andria as among the stars: the city and the sky never remain the same.

As for the character of Andria’s inhabitants, two virtues are worth mentioning: self-confidence and prudence. Convinced that every innovation in the city influences the sky’s pattern, before taking any decision they calculate the risks and advantages for themselves and for the city and for all worlds.





CONTINUOUS CITIES • 4

YOU REPROACH ME because each of my stories takes you right into the heart of a city without telling you of the space that stretches between one city and the other, whether it is covered by seas, or fields of rye, larch forests, swamps. I will answer you with a story.

In the streets of Cecilia, an illustrious city, I met once a goatherd, driving a tinkling flock along the walls.

“Man blessed by heaven,” he asked me, stopping, “can you tell me the name of the city in which we are?”

“May the gods accompany you!” I cried. “How can you fail to recognize the illustrious city of Cecilia?”

“Bear with me,” that man answered. “I am a wandering herdsman. Sometimes my goats and I have to pass through cities; but we are unable to distinguish them. Ask me the names of the grazing lands: I know them all, the Meadow between the Cliffs, the Green Slope, the Shadowed Grass. Cities have no name for me: they are places without leaves, separating one pasture from another, and where the goats are frightened at street corners and scatter. The dog and I run to keep the flock together.”

“I am the opposite of you,” I said. “I recognize only cities and cannot distinguish what is outside them. In uninhabited places each stone and each clump of grass mingles, in my eyes, with every other stone and clump.”

Many years have gone by since then; I have known many more cities and I have crossed continents. One day I was walking among rows of identical houses; I was lost. I asked a passer-by: “May the immortals protect you, can you tell me where we are?”

“In Cecilia, worse luck!” he answered. “We have been wandering through its streets, my goats and I, for an age, and we cannot find our way out. . . .”

I recognized him, despite his long white beard; it was the same herdsman of long before. He was followed by a few, mangy goats, which did not even stink, they were so reduced to skin-and-bones. They cropped wastepaper in the rubbish bins.

“That cannot be!” I shouted. “I, too, entered a city, I cannot remember when, and since then I have gone on, deeper and deeper into its streets. But how have I managed to arrive where you say, when I was in another city, far far away from Cecilia, and I have not yet left it?”

“The places have mingled,” the goatherd said. “Cecilia is everywhere. Here, once upon a time, there must have been the Meadow of the Low Sage. My goats recognize the grass on the traffic island.”





HIDDEN CITIES • 3

A SIBYL, QUESTIONED about Marozia’s fate, said: “I see two cities: one of the rat, one of the swallow.”

This was the interpretation of the oracle: today Marozia is a city where all run through leaden passages like packs of rats who tear from one another’s teeth the leftovers which fall from the teeth of the most voracious ones; but a new century is about to begin in which all the inhabitants of Marozia will fly like swallows in the summer sky, calling one another as in a game, showing off, their wings still, as they swoop, clearing the air of mosquitos and gnats.

“It is time for the century of the rat to end and the century of the swallow to begin,” the more determined said. In fact, already beneath the grim and petty rattish dominion, you could sense, among the less obvious people a pondering, the preparation of a swallowlike flight, heading for the transparent air with a deft flick of the tail, then tracing with their wings’ blade the curve of an opening horizon.

I have come back to Marozia after many years: for some time the sibyl’s prophecy is considered to have come true; the old century is dead and buried, the new is at its climax. The city has surely changed, and perhaps for the better. But the wings I have seen moving about are those of suspicious umbrellas under which heavy eyelids are lowered; there are people who believe they are flying, but it is already an achievement if they can get off the ground flapping their batlike overcoats.

It also happens that, if you move along Marozia’s compact walls, when you least expect it, you see a crack open and a different city appear. Then, an instant later, it has already vanished. Perhaps everything lies in knowing what words to speak, what actions to perform, and in what order and rhythm; or else someone’s gaze, answer, gesture is enough; it is enough for someone to do something for the sheer pleasure of doing it, and for his pleasure to become the pleasure of others: at that moment, all spaces change, all heights, distances; the city is transfigured, becomes crystalline, transparent as a dragonfly. But everything must happen as if by chance, without attaching too much importance to it, without insisting that you are performing a decisive operation, remembering clearly that any moment the old Marozia will return and solder its ceiling of stone, cobwebs, and mold over all heads.

Was the oracle mistaken? Not necessarily. I interpret it in this way: Marozia consists of two cities, the rat’s and the swallow’s; both change with time, but their relationship does not change; the second is the one about to free itself from the first.





CONTINUOUS CITIES • 5

TO TELL YOU about Penthesilea I should begin by describing the entrance to the city. You, no doubt, imagine seeing a girdle of walls rising from the dusty plain as you slowly approach the gate, guarded by customs men who are already casting oblique glances at your bundles. Until you have reached it you are outside it; you pass beneath an archway and you find yourself within the city; its compact thickness surrounds you; carved in its stone there is a pattern that will be revealed to you if you follow its jagged outline.

If this is what you believe, you are wrong: Penthesilea is different. You advance for hours and it is not clear to you whether you are already in the city’s midst or still outside it. Like a lake with low shores lost in swamps, so Penthesilea spreads for miles around, a soupy city diluted in the plain; pale buildings back to back in mangy fields, among plank fences and corrugated-iron sheds. Every now and then at the edges of the street a cluster of constructions with shallow facades, very tall or very low, like a snaggle-toothed comb, seems to indicate that from there the city’s texture will thicken. But you continue and you find instead other vague spaces, then a rusty suburb of workshops and warehouses, a cemetery, a carnival with Ferris wheel, a shambles; you start down a street of scrawny shops which fades amid patches of leprous countryside.

If you ask the people you meet, “Where is Penthesilea?” they make a broad gesture which may mean “Here,” or else “Farther on,” or “All around you,” or even “In the opposite direction.”

“I mean the city,” you ask, insistently.

“We come here every morning to work,” someone answers, while others say, “We come back here at night to sleep.”

“But the city where people live?” you ask.

“It must be that way,” they say, and some raise their arms obliquely toward an aggregation of opaque polyhedrons on the horizon, while others indicate, behind you, the specter of other spires.

“Then I’ve gone past it without realizing it?”

“No, try going on straight ahead.”

And so you continue, passing from outskirts to outskirts, and the time comes to leave Penthesilea. You ask for the road out of the city; you pass again the string of scattered suburbs like a freckled pigmentation; night falls; windows come alight, here more concentrated, sparser there.

You have given up trying to understand whether, hidden in some sac or wrinkle of these dilapidated surroundings there exists a Penthesilea the visitor can recognize and remember, or whether Penthesilea is only the outskirts of itself. The question that now begins to gnaw at your mind is more anguished: outside Penthesilea does an outside exist? Or, no matter how far you go from the city, will you only pass from one limbo to another, never managing to leave it?





HIDDEN CITIES • 4

RECURRENT INVASIONS RACKED the city of Theodora in the centuries of its history; no sooner was one enemy routed than another gained strength and threatened the survival of the inhabitants. When the sky was cleared of condors, they had to face the propagation of serpents; the spiders’ extermination allowed the flies to multiply into a black swarm; the victory over the termites left the city at the mercy of the woodworms. One by one the species incompatible to the city had to succumb and were extinguished. By dint of ripping away scales and carapaces, tearing off elytra and feathers, the people gave Theodora the exclusive image of human city that still distinguishes it.

But first, for many long years, it was uncertain whether or not the final victory would not go to the last species left to fight man’s possession of the city: the rats. From each generation of rodents that the people managed to exterminate, the few survivors gave birth to a tougher progeny, invulnerable to traps and resistant to all poison. In the space of a few weeks, the sewers of Theodora were repopulated with hordes of spreading rats. At last, with an extreme massacre, the murderous, versatile ingenuity of mankind defeated the overweening life-force of the enemy.

The city, great cemetery of the animal kingdom, was closed, aseptic, over the final buried corpses with their last fleas and their last germs. Man had finally reestablished the order of the world which he had himself upset: no other living species existed to cast any doubts. To recall what had been fauna, Theodora’s library would preserve on its shelves the volumes of Buffon and Linnaeus.

At least that is what Theodora’s inhabitants believed, far from imagining that a forgotten fauna was stirring from its lethargy. Relegated for long eras to remote hiding places, ever since it had been deposed by the system of non-extinct species, the other fauna was coming back to the light from the library’s basements where the incunabula were kept; it was leaping from the capitals and drainpipes, perching at the sleepers’ bedside. Sphinxes, griffons, chimeras, dragons, hircocervi, harpies, hydras, unicorns, basilisks were resuming possession of their city.





HIDDEN CITIES • 5

I SHOULD NOT tell you of Berenice, the unjust city, which crowns with triglyphs, abaci, metopes the gears of its meat-grinding machines (the men assigned to polishing, when they raise their chins over the balustrades and contemplate the atria, stairways, porticos, feel even more imprisoned and short of stature). Instead, I should tell you of the hidden Berenice, the city of the just, handling makeshift materials in the shadowy rooms behind the shops and beneath the stairs, linking a network of wires and pipes and pulleys and pistons and counterweights that infiltrates like a climbing plant among the great cogged wheels (when they jam, a subdued ticking gives warning that a new precision mechanism is governing the city). Instead of describing to you the perfumed pools of the baths where the unjust of Berenice recline and weave their intrigues with rotund eloquence and observe with a proprietary eye the rotund flesh of the bathing odalisques, I should say to you how the just, always cautious to evade the spying sycophants and the Janissaries’ mass arrests, recognize one another by their way of speaking, especially their pronunciation of commas and parentheses; from their habits which remain austere and innocent, avoiding complicated and nervous moods; from their sober but tasty cuisine, which evokes an ancient golden age: rice and celery soup, boiled beans, fried squash flowers.

From these data it is possible to deduce an image of the future Berenice, which will bring you closer to knowing the truth than any other information about the city as it is seen today. You must nevertheless bear in mind what I am about to say to you: in the seed of the city of the just, a malignant seed is hidden, in its turn: the certainty and pride of being in the right – and of being more just than many others who call themselves more just than the just. This seed ferments in bitterness, rivalry, resentment; and the natural desire of revenge on the unjust is colored by a yearning to be in their place and to act as they do. Another unjust city, though different from the first, is digging out its space within the double sheath of the unjust and just Berenices.

Having said this, I do not wish your eyes to catch a distorted image, so I must draw your attention to an intrinsic quality of this unjust city germinating secretly inside the secret just city: and this is the possible awakening – as if in an excited opening of windows – of a later love for justice, not yet subjected to rules, capable of reassembling a city still more just than it was before it became the vessel of injustice. But if you peer deeper into this new germ of justice you can discern a tiny spot that is spreading like the mounting tendency to impose what is just through what is unjust, and perhaps this is the germ of an immense metropolis. . . .

From my words you will have reached the conclusion that the real Berenice is a temporal succession of different cities, alternately just and unjust. But what I wanted to warn you about is something else: all the future Berenices are already present in this instant, wrapped one within the other, confined, crammed, inextricable.





The Great Khan’s atlas contains also the maps of the promised lands visited in thought but not yet discovered or founded: New Atlantis, Utopia, the City of the Sun, Oceana, Tamoé, New Harmony, New Lanark, Icaria.

Kublai asked Marco: “You, who go about exploring and who see signs, can tell me toward which of these futures the favoring winds are driving us.”

“For these ports I could not draw a route on the map or set a date for the landing. At times all I need is a brief glimpse, an opening in the midst of an incongruous landscape, a glint of lights in the fog, the dialogue of two passers-by meeting in the crowd, and I think that, setting out from there, I will put together, piece by piece, the perfect city, made of fragments mixed with the rest, of instants separated by intervals, of signals one sends out, not knowing who receives them. If I tell you that the city toward which my journey tends is discontinuous in space and time, now scattered, now more condensed, you must not believe the search for it can stop. Perhaps while we speak, it is rising, scattered, within the confines of your empire; you can hunt for it, but only in the way I have said.”

Already the Great Khan was leafing through his atlas, over the maps of the cities that menace in nightmares and maledictions: Enoch, Babylon, Yahooland, Butua, Brave New World.

He said: “It is all useless, if the last landing place can only be the infernal city, and it is there that, in ever-narrowing circles, the current is drawing us.”

And Polo said: “The inferno of the living is not something that will be; if there is one, it is what is already here, the inferno where we live every day, that we form by being together. There are two ways to escape suffering it. The first is easy for many: accept the inferno and become such a part of it that you can no longer see it. The second is risky and demands constant vigilance and apprehension: seek and learn to recognize who and what, in the midst of the inferno, are not inferno, then make them endure, give them space.”



The Castle




In the midst of a thick forest, there was a castle that gave shelter to all travelers overtaken by night on their journey: lords and ladies, royalty and their retinue, humble wayfarers.

I crossed a rattling drawbridge. I slipped from my saddle in a dark courtyard. Silent grooms took my horse. I was breathless, hardly able to stand on my legs; after entering the forest I had faced so many trials, encounters, apparitions, duels, that I could no longer order my actions or my thoughts.

I climbed some stairs; I found myself in a high, spacious hall. Many people—also transient guests surely, who had preceded me along the path through the woods—were seated at supper at a table lighted by candelabra.

As I looked around, I felt a curious sensation, or, rather, two distinct sensations, which mingled in my mind, still upset and somewhat unstable in my weariness. I seemed to be at a sumptuous court, which no one would have expected to find in such a rustic and out-of-the-way castle; and its wealth was evident not only in the costly furnishings and the graven vessels, but also in the calm and ease which reigned among those at the table, all handsome of person and clothed with elaborate elegance. But, at the same time, I remarked a feeling of random, of disorder, if not actually of license, as if this were not a lordly dwelling but an inn of passage, where people unknown to one another live together for one night and where, in that enforced promiscuity, all feel a relaxation of the rules by which they live in their own surroundings, and—as one resigns oneself to less comfortable ways of life—so one also indulges in freer, unfamiliar behavior. In fact, the two contradictory impressions could nevertheless refer to a single object: whether the castle, for years visited only as a stopping place, had gradually degenerated into an inn, and the lord and his lady had found themselves reduced to the roles of host and hostess, though still going through the motions of their aristocratic hospitality; or whether a tavern, such as one often sees in the vicinity of castles, to give drink to soldiers and horsemen, had invaded—the castle being long abandoned—the ancient, noble halls to install its benches and hogsheads there, and the pomp of those rooms—as well as the coming and going of illustrious customers—had conferred on the inn an unforeseen dignity, sufficient to put ideas in the heads of the host and hostess, who finally came to believe themselves the rulers of a brilliant court.

These thoughts, to tell the truth, occupied me only for a moment; stronger were my relief at being safe and sound in the midst of a select company and my impatience to strike up a conversation (at a nod of invitation from the man who seemed the lord—or the host—I had sat down at the only empty place) and to exchange with my traveling companions tales of the adventures we had undergone. But at this table, contrary to the custom of inns, and also of courts, no one uttered a word. When a guest wished to ask his neighbor to pass the salt or the ginger, he did so with a gesture, and with gestures he also addressed the servants, motioning them to cut him a slice of pheasant pie or to pour him a half pint of wine.

I decided to break what I believed a drowsiness of tongues after the trials of the journey, and I was about to burst forth with a loud exclamation such as “Health to all !” or “Well met!” or “It’s an ill wind . . .”; but no sound came from my lips. The drumming of spoons, the rattle of goblets and crockery were enough to persuade me I had not gone deaf: I could only presume I had been struck dumb. My fellow diners confirmed this supposition, moving their lips silently in a gracefully resigned manner: it was clear that crossing the forest had cost each of us the power of speech.

When our supper ended in a muteness which the sounds of chewing and the smacking of lips gulping wine did not make more pleasant, we remained seated, looking one another in the face, with the torment of not being able to exchange the many experiences each of us had to communicate. At that point, on the table which had just been cleared, the man who seemed the lord of the castle set a pack of playing cards. They were tarot cards, larger than the kind we use for ordinary games or that gypsies employ for predicting the future, but it was possible to discern more or less the same figures that are painted in the enamels of the most precious miniatures. Kings, Queens, Knights, and Pages were all young people magnificently dressed, as if for a princely feast; the twenty-two Major Arcana seemed the tapestries of a court theater; and cups, coins, swords, clubs shone like heraldic devices adorned with scrolls and arabesques.

We began to spread out the cards on the table, face up, and to give them their proper value in games, or their true meaning in the reading of fortunes. And yet none of us seemed to wish to begin playing, and still less to question the future, since we were as if drained of all future, suspended in a journey that had not ended nor was to end. There was something else we saw in those tarots, something that no longer allowed us to take our eyes from the gilded pieces of that mosaic.

One of the guests drew the scattered cards to himself, leaving a large part of the table clear; but he did not gather them into a pack nor did he shuffle them; he took one card and placed it in front of himself. We all noticed the resemblance between his face and the face on the card, and we thought we understood that, with the card, he wanted to say “I” and that he was preparing to tell his story.





The Tale of the Ingrate and His Punishment




Introducing himself to us with the figure of the Knight of Cups—a pink and blond youth displaying a sun-shaped cloak radiant with embroidery, and offering with outstretched hand a gift like those of the Magi—our fellow guest probably wished to inform us of his wealthy station, his inclination toward luxury and prodigality, and also—showing himself mounted—his spirit of adventure, inspired, however (I judged, observing all that embroidery, even on the steed’s trappings), more by a love of display than by a true knightly vocation.

The handsome youth made a gesture, as if to demand our full attention, and then began his silent tale, arranging three cards in a row on the table: the King of Coins, the Ten of Coins, and the Nine of Clubs. The mournful expression with which he set down the first of these cards, and the joyous look with which he showed the next one, seemed to want to tell us that, his father having died—the King of Coins represented a slightly older personage than the others, with a mature and prosperous appearance—he had come into possession of a considerable fortune and had immediately set forth on his travels. This last notion we deduced from his arm’s movement in throwing down the Nine of Clubs, which—with the tangle of boughs extended over a sparse growth of leaves and little wild flowers—reminded us of the forest through which we had recently passed. (Indeed, if one examined the card with a sharper eye, the vertical line, which crosses the other, oblique pieces of wood, suggested, in fact, the idea of the road penetrating into the depth of the forest.)

This, then, could be the beginning of the story: the knight, as soon as he learned he had the means to shine at the most magnificent courts, hastened to set out, his purse brimming with gold coins, to visit the most famous castles of the neighboring country, perhaps with the aim of winning a wife of high degree; and cherishing these dreams, he entered the woods.

To this row of cards, another was added, which surely announced some ugly encounter: Strength. In our tarot pack this Arcanum was represented by an armed brute, whose evil intentions were unequivocally indicated by his cruel expression, by the club swung in the air, and by his violence in striking a lion to the ground with a single sharp blow, as one might kill a rabbit. The story was, alas, clear: in the heart of the forest the knight was ambushed by a fierce brigand. Our worst prophecies were confirmed by the following card, the Twelfth Arcanum, known as The Hanged Man, in which you see a man in shirt and trousers, strung up by one foot, his head hanging downward. In the man we again recognized our blond youth; the brigand had stripped him of all his belongings and had left him hanging from a branch, his head toward the ground.

We sighed in relief at the news given us by the Arcanum Temperance, set on the table by our companion with an expression of gratitude. From it we learned that the hanging man had heard footsteps approaching and his upside-down eye had seen a maiden, daughter perhaps of a woodsman or a goatherd, who was advancing, her calves bare, over the meadows, carrying two pitchers of water, surely on her way back from the spring. We had no doubt that the man strung up by his feet would be freed and restored to his natural position by that simple child of the woods. When we saw the Ace of Cups fall, with its depiction of a fountain purling amidst flowering mosses and rustling wings, we could almost hear the gurgle of a nearby spring and the gasping of that man, lying prone to quench his thirst.

But there are fountains—as some of us surely thought—that, once you drink from them, increase your thirst instead of slaking it. One might predict that between the two young people there sprang up, once the knight recovered from his dizziness, a sentiment that went beyond gratitude (on his part) and beyond pity (on hers), and that this sentiment would find—thanks to the woods’ complicity and darkness—prompt expression in an embrace on the grassy meadow. It was no accident that the next card was a Two of Cups, embellished with a scroll reading “My Love” and bedecked with forget-me-nots: a more than probable indication of an amorous encounter.

All of us, and especially the ladies of the company, were preparing to enjoy the continuation of a tender love story, when the knight laid down another Club, the Seven, where, among the dark trunks of a forest, we seemed to see his faint shadow moving away. There was no deceiving ourselves that matters had gone otherwise: the sylvan idyll had been brief, poor maiden; having plucked the flower in the meadow and dropped it there, the ungrateful knight did not even look back to bid her farewell.

At this point it was clear that a second part of the tale was beginning, perhaps after a lapse of time. The narrator, in fact, had begun arranging other cards in a new row, beside the first, on the left; he set down two cards, The Empress and the Eight of Cups. The sudden change of scene disconcerted us for a moment; but the solution quickly asserted itself, I believe to us all, and it was that the knight had finally found what he had been seeking, a wealthy bride of high lineage, such as we saw depicted there, a crowned head, indeed, with her family shield and her insipid face—also slightly older than he, as the more malicious amongst us surely noticed—in a dress all embroidered in linked rings as if to say, “Marry me, marry me.” An invitation promptly accepted, since the Cups card suggested a wedding banquet, with two rows of guests toasting the couple at the end of the festooned table.

The card that was laid down next, the Knight of Swords, appearing in war array, announced an unforeseen event: either a mounted messenger had burst in on the feast, bearing disturbing news, or the groom himself had abandoned the wedding banquet to hasten, armed, into the woods at some mysterious summons, or perhaps both things at once: the groom had been informed of a sudden apparition and had immediately seized his arms and leapt into the saddle. (The wiser for his past adventure, he never stuck his nose out of the door unless armed from head to toe.)

Impatiently, we awaited a more explanatory card; and The Sun then came. The painter had depicted the day’s star in the hands of a child, running or, rather, flying over a vast and varied landscape. The interpretation of this passage in the tale was not easy. It could simply mean “it was a fine sunny day,” and in this case our narrator was wasting his cards telling us inessential details. But perhaps the allegorical significance of the picture was less to be dwelt on than its literal meaning: a half-naked child had been seen running in the neighborhood of the castle where the wedding was being celebrated, and the groom had deserted the banquet to pursue that urchin.

The object the child was carrying, however, could not be overlooked: that radiant head might contain the solution to the riddle. Glancing again at the card with which our hero had first introduced himself, we were reminded of the solar patterns or embroidered motifs on the cloak he had been wearing when attacked by the brigand: perhaps that cloak, which the knight had forgotten in the meadow of his fleeting love, had been fluttering over the countryside like a kite, and he was pursuing the urchin to recover it, or else out of curiosity to know how it had ended up there, what link, in other words, connected the cloak, the child, and the maiden of the forest.

We hoped these questions would be answered by the following card, and when we saw it was Justice we were convinced that in this Arcanum—which showed not only a woman with sword and scales, as in ordinary tarot packs, but also, in the background (or, according to how you looked at it, in a lunette over the main figure) a mounted warrior (or an Amazon?), in armor, moving to the attack—there was contained one of the chapters richest in adventures of our tale. We could only venture some guesses. For example: as he was about to overtake the child with the kite, the pursuer had found his way blocked by another knight, fully armed. What can they have said to each other? To begin with: “Who goes there?”

And the unknown knight then revealed his countenance, the face of a woman our companion recognized as the maiden who had saved him in the forest, now fuller, more resolute, and more calm, with the hint of a melancholy smile on her lips. “What do you want of me?” he must have asked her then.

“Justice!” the Amazon said. (The scales, in fact, alluded to this answer.)

On further reflection, however, we thought the encounter might have gone as follows: a mounted Amazon came charging from the woods (background or lunette figure) and shouted at him: “Halt! Do you know whom you are pursuing?”

“Who, pray?”

“Your son!” the warrior-woman said, revealing her face (the figure in the foreground).

“What can I do?” our hero must have asked, gripped by sudden and belated remorse.

“Face the justice (scales) of God! Defend yourself!” and she (sword) brandished her sword.

“Now he’ll tell us about the duel,” I thought, and, to be sure, the card thrown down at that moment was the clattering Two of Swords. The shredded leaves of the woods flew and the climbing vines twisted around the two blades. But the disconsolate gaze that the narrator cast at this card left no uncertainty as to the outcome: his adversary proved to be a seasoned swordswoman; so it was his turn, now, to lie bleeding in the midst of the meadow.

He comes to his senses, opens his eyes, and what does he see? (This was the narrator’s miming—a bit overdone, to tell the truth—inviting us to wait for the next card as if for a revelation.) The Popess, mysterious, nun-like crowned figure. Had he been given succor by a female monarch? His eyes, staring at the card, were filled with horror. A witch? He raised his imploring hands in a gesture of devout terror. The High Priestess of a secret and sanguinary cult?

“Know then that, in the person of that maiden, you have offended”—(what else can the Popess have said to him, to cause that grimace of terror?)—”you have offended Cybele, the goddess to whom this forest is sacred. Now you have fallen into our hands.”

And what can he have replied, except, in an imploring stammer: “I shall expiate, I shall appease, mercy. . . .”

“Now the forest shall have you. The forest is self-loss, mingling. To join us you must lose yourself, tear away your attributes, dismember yourself, be transformed into the undistinguished, join the swarm of Maenads who run screaming in the woods.”

“No!” was the cry we saw escape his silenced throat, but already the last card was concluding his tale, and this was the Eight of Swords, the sharp blades of Cybele’s disheveled followers, as they fell upon him and tore him to pieces.





The Tale of the Alchemist Who Sold His Soul




The emotion aroused by this story had not yet died away when another of our companions indicated that he wanted to tell his own. One episode, especially, in the knight’s tale seemed to have attracted his attention, or, rather, it was one of the random pairings of cards in the second row: the Ace of Cups, placed beside The Popess. To suggest how he felt personally involved in that juxtaposition, he pushed up to the right of those two cards the figure of the King of Cups (which could have passed for a very youthful and—to tell the truth—exaggeratedly flattering portrait of him) and, on the left, continuing in a horizontal line, an Eight of Clubs.

The first interpretation that this sequence called to mind, if we continued attributing an aura of voluptuousness to the fountain, was that our fellow guest had had amorous relations with a nun in a wood. Or else that he had offered her copious drink, since the fountain, if you examined it closely, seemed to pour from a little cask set on top of a grape press. But the melancholy stare of the man’s face seemed lost in speculations from which not only carnal passions but even the most venial pleasures of table and cellar had to be excluded. Lofty meditations must have been his, though his worldly appearance left no doubt that they were still addressed to the Earth and not to Heaven. (And so another possible interpretation was eliminated: that the card depicted a holy-water stoup.)

The most probable hypothesis that occurred to me was that the card stood for the Fountain of Life, the supreme goal of the alchemist’s search, and that our companion was, in fact, one of those scholars who scrutinize alembics and crucibles (like the complicated vessel that his royally clad figure held in its hand), trying to wrest from Nature her secrets, and especially that of the transformation of metals.

We could believe that, from his earliest youth (this was the meaning of the portrait with adolescent features, which could at the same time allude also to the elixir of long life) he had had no other passion (the fountain remained nevertheless an amorous symbol) save the manipulation of the elements, and for years he had waited to see the yellow king of the mineral world precipitate in the depths of his cauldron. And in this quest he had finally sought the counsel and aid of those women sometimes encountered in forests, experts in philters and magic potions, devoted to the arts of witchcraft and foretelling the future (like the woman he indicated, with superstitious reverence, as The Popess).

The card that came next, The Emperor, could naturally refer to a prophecy of the forest witch: You will become the most powerful man in the world.

It would hardly have been surprising if our alchemist had got a swelled head, expecting any day an extraordinary change in the course of his life. This event must have been indicated in the following card, which was the enigmatic First Arcanum, sometimes known as The Juggler, in which some see a charlatan or magician performing his tricks.

So, then, our hero, raising his eyes from his desk, had seen a magician seated before him, as he handled his alembics and his retorts.

“Who are you? What are you doing here?”

“Watch what I do,” the magician answered, pointing to a glass flask over a fire.

The dazzled look with which our companion threw down the Seven of Coins left no doubt about what he had seen: the splendor of all the mines of the Orient lying open before him.

“You can give me the secret of gold?” he must have asked the charlatan.

The following card was a Two of Coins, sign of an exchange, I thought spontaneously, a sale, a barter.

“I will sell it to you!” the unknown visitor must have replied.

“What do you want in return?”

The answer we all expected was “Your soul!” but we were not sure until the narrator turned over the new card (and he lingered a moment before doing so, not placing it next to the previous one but after the last, thus beginning a new row in the opposite direction). This card was The Devil; in short, he had recognized in the charlatan the old prince of all mingling and ambiguity—just as we now recognized our companion as Doctor Faust.

So Mephistopheles had then answered, “Your soul!”: an idea that can be represented only with the figure of Psyche, the young girl who illuminates the shadows with her light, as she is contemplated in The Star. The Five of Cups which was then shown us could be read as the alchemistic secret the Devil revealed to Faust, or as a toast to seal their bargain, or as the bells which, with their strokes, put the infernal visitor to flight. But we could also interpret the card as a discourse upon the soul and upon the body as the soul’s vessel. (One of the five cups was painted horizontally, as if it were empty.)

“My soul?” our Faust may have answered. “And what if I had no soul?”

But perhaps it was not for an individual soul that Mephistopheles had inconvenienced himself. “With the gold you will build a city,” he was saying to Faust. “It is the entire city’s soul that I want in exchange.”

“It’s a deal.”

And the Devil could then truly vanish with a sneer that seemed a howl: long-time inhabitant of steeples, accustomed to contemplating, from his perch on a rain-spout, the expanse of roofs, he knew that the souls of cities are more substantial and more lasting than those of all their inhabitants put together.

Now there was still The Wheel of Fortune to interpret, one of the most complicated images in the whole tarot game. It could mean simply that fortune had turned in Faust’s direction, but this explanation seemed too obvious for the alchemist’s narrative style, always elliptical and allusive. On the other hand, it was legitimate to suppose that our doctor, having got possession of the diabolical secret, conceived a monstrous plan: to change into gold all that was changeable. The wheel of the Tenth Arcanum would then literally mean the toiling gears of the Great Gold Mill, the gigantic mechanism which would raise up the Metropolis of Precious Metal; and the human forms of various ages seen pushing the wheel or rotating with it were there to indicate the crowds of men who eagerly lent a hand to the project and dedicated the years of their lives to turning those wheels day and night. This interpretation failed to take into account all the details of the miniature (for example, the animalesque ears and tails that adorned some of the revolving human figures), but it was a basis for interpreting the following cards of cups and coins as the Kingdom of Abundance in which the City of Gold’s inhabitants wallowed. (The rows of yellow circles perhaps evoked the gleaming domes of golden skyscrapers that flanked the streets of the Metropolis.)

But when would the established price be collected by the Cloven Contracting Party? The story’s two final cards were already on the table, placed there by the first narrator: the Two of Swords and Temperance. At the gates of the City of Gold armed guards blocked the way to anyone who wished to enter, to prevent access to the Cloven-hooved Collector, no matter in what guise he might turn up. And even if a simple maiden, like the one in the last card, were to approach, the guards made her halt.

“You lock your gates in vain”—this was the answer that could be expected from the water-bearer. “I take care not to enter a City where all is of solid metal. We who live in what is fluid visit only elements that flow and mingle.”

Was she a water nymph? Was she the queen of the elves of the air? An angel of the liquid fire in the earth’s center?

(In The Wheel of Fortune, if you looked carefully, the bestial metamorphoses seemed perhaps only the first step in a regression of the human to the vegetable and mineral.)

“Are you afraid our souls will fall into the Devil’s hands?” those of the City must have asked.

“No, for you have no soul to give him.”





The Tale of the Doomed Bride




I have no idea how many of us managed to decipher the tale somehow, without getting lost among all those low cards, cups and coins, that popped up just when we were most eager for a clear exposition of the facts. The narrator’s powers of communication were scant, perhaps because his genius was more inclined to the severity of abstractions than to the obviousness of images. In any case, some of us allowed our minds to wander, or we lingered over certain couplings of cards and were unable to go on.

One of us, for example, a warrior with melancholy eyes, began toying with a Page of Swords, which strongly resembled him, and a Six of Clubs; and he placed them beside the Seven of Coins and The Star, as if he wanted to build up a vertical row on his own.

Perhaps for him, a soldier lost in the woods, those cards, followed by The Star, meant a glimmer, like a will-o’-the wisp’s, which had drawn him to a clearing among the trees, where a young maiden of starry pallor appeared to him, wandering in the night in her shift, her hair undone, holding a lighted taper aloft.

However it was, he continued unperturbed, making his vertical line; he put down two Swords, a Seven and a Queen, a combination difficult to interpret as such. It required perhaps a bit of dialogue, instead, along these lines:

“Noble knight, I implore you, remove your weapons and your breastplate, and let me put them on!” (In the miniature, the Queen of Swords wears a set of armor, complete with tasses, couters, gauntlets, which shows like an iron undergarment below the embroidered hems of her snow-white silken sleeves.) “In a daze, I promised myself to someone whose embrace I now abhor, and tonight he will come to demand I keep my word! I can hear him approaching! If I am armed, he cannot clasp me! Pray, save a persecuted maiden!”

There was no doubt that the warrior had promptly consented. With the armor on, the poor maid was transformed into a tourney queen, strutting, preening. A smile of sensual joy kindled the pallor of her face.

But here again a whole assortment of stupid cards began, and it was a problem to make head or tail of them: a Two of Clubs (sign of a crossroads, a choice?), an Eight of Coins (hidden treasure?), a Six of Cups (an amorous tryst?).

“Your courtesy deserves a guerdon,” the woman of the forest must have said. “Choose the prize you prefer: I can give you riches, or . . .”

“Or?”

“ . . . I can give you myself.”

The warrior’s hand tapped the Cups card: he had chosen love.

For the rest of the tale we had to use our imagination: he was already naked, she stripped off the armor she had barely put on, and among the bronze scales our hero grasped a round and taut and soft breast, he slipped between the iron cuisse and the warm thigh. . . .

Reserved and modest by nature, the soldier did not dwell on the details: he told us what he could by putting beside the Cups card another gilded Coins card, with a wistful look, as if to exclaim: “I thought I had entered Paradise. . . .”

The card he set down afterward confirmed this image of the threshold of Paradise, but at the same time it brusquely interrupted his voluptuous abandon: it was The Pope, a pontiff with an austere white beard, like the first Pope, now guardian of the Gate of Heaven.

“Who dares speak of Paradise?” High over the forest, in the midst of the sky, Saint Peter appeared, enthroned, thundering: “For her our gates are closed to all eternity!”

The way our narrator put down a new card, rapidly, but keeping it hidden and shielding his eyes with his other hand, prepared us for a revelation: the one he had found when, lowering his gaze from the menacing threshold of Heaven, he looked at the lady in whose arms he was lying, and saw that the gorget no longer framed a turtle-dove countenance, pert dimples, little tilted nose, but an array of teeth without gums or lips, two nostrils hollowed from bone, the yellow jaws of a skull, and he felt his limbs entwined with the stiff limbs of a corpse.

The ghastly sight of Arcanum Thirteen (the legend Death does not even appear in the decks whose major cards bear their names written out) aroused in all of us an impatience to learn the rest of the tale. Was the Ten of Swords which now came the barrier of archangels, blocking the damned soul’s access to Heaven? Was the Five of Clubs announcing a path through the forest?

At this point the file of cards was again connected with The Devil, already set in that place by the previous narrator.

I did not have to rack my brains long to understand that from the forest had come the betrothed whom the deceased bride-to-be had so feared: Beelzebub in person, who exclaimed: “So, my proud beauty, here is an end to your shifting your cards! I care not twopence (Two of Coins) for all your arms and armor (Four of Swords)!” And, with that, he carried her down into the bowels of the earth.





A Grave-Robber’s Tale




The cold sweat was still damp on my spine when I was already obliged to follow another neighbor, in whom the quadrangle of Death, Pope, Eight of Coins, Two of Clubs seemed to waken other memories, to judge by the way his gaze shifted about, while he bent his head to one side, as if uncertain from which direction to enter the square. When he set at its edge the Page of Coins, a figure in which it was easy to recognize his provocative, bold manner, I knew he also wanted to tell us something, beginning there, and I knew it was his own story.

But what did this carefree youth have in common with the macabre reign of skeletons evoked by Arcanum Thirteen? He surely was not the sort to roam meditating in graveyards, unless he had been drawn there by some rascally intention: for example, to force the graves and steal from the dead the precious objects they had rashly taken with them on their last journey. . . .

It is usually the Great of the Earth who are buried with the attributes of their rule, gold crowns, rings, scepters, garments of shining metal. If this young man was really a grave-robber, he must have gone to cemeteries in search of the most illustrious graves, the tomb of a Pope, for example, since pontiffs descend into their graves in all the splendor of their trappings. The thief, on a moonless night, must have raised the heavy lid of the tomb, with Two Clubs as levers, and then dropped into the sepulcher.

And after that? The narrator set an Ace of Clubs down and made an upward gesture, as of something growing: for a moment I thought my whole conjecture was mistaken, that gesture seemed so contradictory to the thief’s sinking into the papal tomb. Unless I was to suppose that, as soon as the tomb was uncovered, a tree trunk, erect and very tall, appeared, and that the thief climbed up it, or else he felt himself borne up, to the top of the tree, among the branches, into the leafy crown.

The man may have been a gallows bird, but luckily, in telling his tale he did not simply confine himself to adding one tarot to another (he proceeded with pairs of flanking cards, in a double horizontal row, from left to right); he aided himself with well-calculated gesticulation, simplifying our task a bit. And so I managed to understand that, with the Ten of Cups, he meant the sight of the cemetery from above, as he contemplated it from the top of the tree, with all the tombs lined up on their pedestals along the paths. Whereas with the Arcanum known as The Angel or The Last Judgment (in which the angels around the celestial throne are sounding the reveille that uncovers the tombs) he perhaps wanted only to underline the fact that he was looking down on the tombs from above as the inhabitants of Heaven might on the Great Day.

At the top of the tree, climbing up like an urchin, our hero reached a suspended city. Or so I interpreted the greatest of the Arcana, The World, which in this tarot pack depicts a city floating on waves or clouds and held up by two winged cherubs. It was a city whose roofs touched heaven’s vault, as The Tower of Babel once had, as we were shown, next, by another Arcanum.

“He who descends into the abyss of Death and climbs again the Tree of Life”—these are the words with which I imagined our involuntary pilgrim was received—“arrives in the City of the Possible, from which the Whole is contemplated and Choices are decided.”

Here the narrator’s miming no longer assisted us and we had to work again through conjectures. We could imagine that, having entered the City of the Whole and of the Parts, our scoundrel heard himself addressed with these words:

“Do you want riches (Coins) or power (Swords) or wisdom (Cups)? Choose, at once!”

It was a stern and radiant archangel (Knight of Swords) who addressed this question to him, and our hero answered quickly, crying out: “I choose riches (Coins)!”

“You shall have Clubs!” was the reply of the mounted archangel, as city and tree dissolved into smoke and the thief hurtled down through crashing, broken branches into the midst of the forest.





The Tale of Roland Crazed with Love




Now the cards arranged on the table formed a square, with all of its sides closed, and a still-empty window left in the center. Over this empty space bent one of the guests, who until then had seemed lost in thought, his gaze wandering. He was a gigantic warrior; he raised his arms as if they were of lead, and he turned his head slowly as if the heavy burden of his thoughts had cracked his spine. Certainly a profound distress was weighing upon this captain who, not long ago, must have been like murderous lightning in warfare.

He set down the figure of the King of Swords, which attempted to render in a single portrait his bellicose past and his melancholy present, at the square’s left edge, beside the Ten of Swords. And our eyes seemed suddenly blinded by the great dust cloud of battles: we heard the blare of trumpets; already the shattered spears were flying; already the clashing horses’ muzzles were drenched in iridescent foam; already the swords, with the flat or the cutting edge, were striking against the flat or cutting edge of other swords; and where a circle of living enemies sprang up in their saddles and then, falling again, found not their horses but the grave, there in the center of this circle was the paladin Roland, whirling his Durendal. We had recognized him; it was he, telling his own story, in fits and starts, pressing his iron-like finger on each card.

Now he pointed to the Queen of Swords. In the figure of this blond woman who, among sharpened blades and iron plates, proffers the elusive smile of a sensual game, we recognized Angelica, the enchantress come from Cathay to ruin the French armies; and we were convinced Count Roland was still in love with her.

After her came the empty space: Roland put a card there, the Ten of Clubs. We saw the forest open, reluctantly, at the champion’s progress, the needles of the fir trees bristle like a porcupine’s quills, the oaks swell their trunks’ muscular chests, the beeches tear their roots from the ground to block his progress. The whole wood seemed to say to him: “Go no farther! Why are you deserting the metallic fields of war, realm of the discontinuous and the distinct, the congenial massacres where your talent excels in sundering and excluding, to venture now into green, mucilaginous Nature, among the coils of living continuity? The forest of love, Roland, is no place for you! You are pursuing an enemy from whose snares no shield can protect you. Forget Angelica! Turn back!”

But it was certain that Roland did not lend an ear to these warnings and a single vision held him: the one represented by Arcanum Seven, which he now put on the table, The Chariot. The artist who, with gleaming enamels, had illuminated these tarots of ours had this Chariot driven not by the usual king seen in more common cards, but by a woman dressed as a sorceress or Oriental queen, holding the reins of two white, winged horses. This was how Roland’s raving imagination conceived Angelica’s enchanted entrance into the forest; it was a print of flying hoofs he pursued, lighter than a butterfly’s feet, the trail that was his guide through the thicket.

Wretched man! He did not yet know that in the deepest part of the thicket Angelica and Medoro were meanwhile united in a soft, heart-rending embrace. It took the Arcanum of Love to reveal this to him, with the languor of desire our miniaturist had been able to give the two lovers’ gaze. (We began to understand that, with those iron hands and that dreaming air, Roland had, from the beginning, kept for himself the most beautiful cards in the pack, allowing the others to stammer out their vicissitudes to the sound of cups and clubs, gold coins and swords.)

The truth forced its way into Roland’s thoughts: in the moist depths of the female forest there is a temple of Eros where other values count, not the ones determined by his Durendal. Angelica’s favorite was not one of the illustrious commanders of troops but a youth of the entourage, slender, coy as a girl; his figure, enlarged, appeared in the following card: the Page of Clubs.

Where had the lovers fled? Whichever path they had taken, the substance they were made of was too fragile and elusive to allow the paladin’s iron paws to grasp them. When he had lost all uncertainty about the end of his hopes, Roland made a few clumsy gestures—drawing his sword, digging in his spurs, stiffening his legs in his stirrups—and then something in him broke, shattered, exploded, melted: all of a sudden the light of his intellect was extinguished; he was left in darkness.

Now the bridge of cards drawn across the square touched the opposite side, at the level of The Sun. A cupid in flight was carrying off Roland’s sanity, and he hovered over the land of France challenged by the Infidels, over the sea which Saracen galleys would ply with impunity, now that Christianity’s stoutest champion lay beclouded by madness.

Force ended the row. I shut my eyes. My heart could not bear the sight of that flower of chivalry transformed into a blind telluric explosion, like a cyclone or an earthquake. As the Moslem hordes had once been mowed down by Durendal, now the whirling of his club felled the fierce beasts that from Africa through the decay of the invasions had passed to the coasts of Provence and Catalonia; a cloak of feline pelts, tawny and striped and spotted, would cover the fields, now become deserts, where he passed: nor would the cautious lion, nor the linear tiger, nor the retractile leopard survive the slaughter. Then it would be the turn of the elephant, the rhinoceros, and the river-horse or hippopotamus: a layer of pachyderm skins was about to thicken on callused, arid Europe.

The narrator’s iron, punctilious finger made a paragraph, or, rather, it began to spell out the line below, starting at the left. I saw (and heard) the crash of the oaks uprooted by the maniac in the Five of Clubs, and I regretted the idleness of Durendal, hung on a tree and forgotten in the Seven of Swords, I deplored the waste of energy and wealth in the Five of Coins (added, for the occasion, in the empty space).

The card he now placed there in the middle was The Moon. A cold gleam shines on the dark Earth. A nymph with a mad look raises her hand to the golden celestial sickle as if she were playing the harp. True, the string hangs broken from her bow: the Moon is a defeated planet, and the conquering Earth is the Moon’s prisoner. Roland races over an Earth that is now lunar.

The card of The Fool, displayed immediately afterward, was all the more eloquent on the subject. Now that the greatest knot of fury had been undone, with the club on his shoulder like a fishing pole, thin as a skull, tattered, without trousers, his head full of feathers (all sorts of things were stuck in his hair—thrush feathers, chestnut burrs, thorns of butcher’s broom and cabbage rose, worms sucking his spent brains, mushrooms, mosses, galls, sepals), Roland descended into the chaotic heart of things, the center of the square of the cards and of the world, the point of intersection of all possible orders.

His reason? The Three of Cups reminded us that it was in a phial kept in the Valley of Lost Reasons, but since the card displayed an overturned cup between two erect cups, it was probable that it was not even preserved in that vessel.

The last two cards in the row were there on the table. The first was Justice, which we had met before, surmounted by the frieze of the galloping warrior—a sign that the knights of Charlemagne’s Army were following their champion’s trail, keeping watch over him, not abandoning the hope of bringing his sword back to the service of Reason and Justice. Was that blond dispenser of justice with her sword and scales the image of Reason, with whom in any event he would finally have to settle his accounts? Was she the Reason of the story, lurking under the combining Chance of the scattered tarots? Did this mean that, however he may wander, the moment comes when they catch him, Roland, and bind him, and force down his throat the intellect he has rejected?

In the last card we contemplate the paladin strung up by his feet as The Hanged Man. And finally his face has become serene and radiant, his eye clearer than ever it was in the exercise of his past reasons. What does he say? He says: “Leave me like this. I have come full circle and I understand. The world must be read backward. All is clear.”





The Tale of Astolpho on the Moon




On the subject of Roland’s sanity, I would have liked to collect further testimony, especially from the one who had made his recovery a duty, a test for his own ingenious daring. I would have liked him, Astolpho, to be there with us. Among the guests who still had told nothing there was a little fellow, light as a jockey or an elf, who jumped up from time to time, wriggling and trilling as if his muteness and ours were an unparalleled source of amusement for him. Observing him, I realized he might very well be that English knight, and I explicitly urged him to tell us his story, handing him the figure from the pack I thought most resembled him: the gay, rearing Knight of Clubs. Our little smiling companion held out a hand, but instead of taking the card he sent it flying, with a flick of his index finger against his thumb. It fluttered like a leaf in the wind and came to rest on the table, toward the base of the square.

Now there were no more windows open in the center of the mosaic; and few cards were still left out of the game.

The English knight picked up an Ace of Swords (I recognized Roland’s Durendal, idle, hanging from a tree . . .), he moved it toward The Emperor (depicted with the white beard and the ripe wisdom of the enthroned Charlemagne . . .), as if preparing to climb up a vertical column with his story: Ace of Swords, Emperor, Nine of Cups. . . . (As Roland’s absence from the Frankish Field became prolonged, Astolpho was summoned by King Charles and invited to banquet with him. . . .) Then came the half-naked, half-tattered Fool with the feathers on his head, and Love, winged god who from his twisted pedestal flings his darts at lovers. (“You surely know, Astolpho, that the prince of our paladins, our nephew Roland, has lost that illumination that distinguishes man and wise beasts from other beasts and madmen, and now in his folly he runs through the woods, decked with birds’ feathers, and answers only the chirping of those creatures as if he understood no other language. It would be less grave if he had been reduced to this state by a misguided zeal for Christian penance, for self-humiliation, mortification of the flesh, and punishment of the pride of the mind, because in that case the harm might somehow be compensated by a spiritual benefit, or at least it would be a fact that, if we could not boast of it, we could at least mention without shame, perhaps shaking our head a bit; but the trouble is that he was driven to madness by Eros, the pagan god who, the more he is suppressed, the more devastation he causes. . . . ”)

The column continued with The World, where a fortified city is seen, with a circle around it—Paris in the circle of its ramparts, besieged for months by the Saracens—and with The Tower, which depicts with verisimilitude the hurtling of corpses down from the bastions amid torrents of boiling oil and siege machines at work; and so it described the military situation (perhaps with Charlemagne’s very words: “The enemy is pressing at the foot of the heights of Mont Martire and Mont Parnasse, opening breaches at Menilmontant and at Montreuil, setting fires at Porte Dauphine and Porte des Lilas . . .”) with only a last card wanting, the Nine of Swords, to conclude on a note of hope (just as the Emperor’s speech could have no conclusion but this: “Only our nephew could lead us in a sally that would cut through the circle of iron and fire. . . . Go, Astolpho, trace Roland’s reason, wherever it may be lost, and bring it back. It is our only salvation! Hasten! Fly!”).

What was Astolpho to do? He had a good card up his sleeve: the Arcanum known as The Hermit, represented here as an old hunchback with an hourglass in his hand, a soothsayer who overturns irreversible time and sees the After before the Before. So it is to this sage or wizard Merlin that Astolpho turns to discover where Roland’s reason is. The hermit reads the trickle of the grains of sand in the hourglass, and so we prepared to read the second column of the story, which was just to the left, from top to bottom: The Last Judgment, Ten of Cups, The Chariot, The Moon. . . .

“You must ascend to Heaven, Astolpho” (the angelic Arcanum of The Last Judgment indicated a superhuman ascension) “up to the pale fields of the Moon, where an endless storeroom preserves in phials placed in rows” (as in the Cups card) “the stories that men do not live, the thoughts that knock once at the threshold of awareness and vanish forever, the particles of the possible discarded in the game of combinations, the solutions that could be reached but are never reached. . . .”

To go up to the Moon (as the Arcanum The Chariot offered us a superfluous but poetical reminder), it is the custom to resort to hybrid races of winged horses, a Pegasus, a Hippogryph; the Fairies rear them in their golden stables to yoke them, in twos or threes, to racing chariots. Astolpho had his Hippogryph, so he climbed into the saddle. He rode off into the heavens. The waxing Moon came toward him. It glided. (In the card, The Moon was depicted with greater sweetness than it possesses in the portrayal by rustic actors who in midsummer play the drama of Pyramus and Thisbe, but with equally simple allegorical means. . . .)

Then came The Wheel of Fortune at the very moment when we were expecting a more detailed description of the world of the Moon, which would allow us to indulge in the old fancies of an upside-down world, where the ass is king, man is four-legged, the young rule the old, sleepwalkers hold the rudder, citizens spin like squirrels in their cage’s wheel, and there are as many other paradoxes as the imagination can disjoin and join.

Astolpho had climbed up to seek Reason in the world of the gratuitous, himself the Knight of the Gratuitous. What wisdom would be drawn for the Earth’s guidance from this Moon of the poets’ ravings? The knight tried to ask this question of the first inhabitant he met on the Moon: the personage portrayed in the First Arcanum, The Juggler or The Magician; the name and image are uncertainly defined, but here—from the inkwell he holds in his hand as if he were writing—he can be taken for a poet.

On the white fields of the Moon, Astolpho encounters the poet, intent on interpolating into his warp the rhymes of the octaves, the threads of his plots, his reasons and his unreasons. If he inhabits the very center of the Moon—or is inhabited by it, as by his deepest nucleus—he will tell us whether it is true that the Moon contains the universal rhyme-list of words and things, if it is the world full of sense, the opposite of the senseless Earth.

“No, the Moon is a desert.” This was the poet’s reply, to judge by the last card put down on the table: the bald circumference of the Ace of Coins. “From this arid sphere every discourse and every poem sets forth; and every journey through forests, battles, treasures, banquets, bedchambers, brings us back here, to the center of an empty horizon.”





All the Other Tales




The square is now entirely covered with cards and with stories. My story is also contained in it, though I can no longer say which it is, since their simultaneous interweaving has been so close. In fact, the task of deciphering the stories one by one has made me neglect until now the most salient peculiarity of our way of narrating, which is that each story runs into another story, and as one guest is advancing his strip, another, from the other end, advances in the opposite direction, because the stories told from left to right or from bottom to top can also be read from right to left or from top to bottom, and vice versa, bearing in mind that the same cards, presented in a different order, often change their meaning, and the same tarot is used at the same time by narrators who set forth from the four cardinal points.

And so, as Astolpho began to recount his adventure, one of the most beautiful ladies of the company, introducing herself through the amorous profile of the Queen of Coins, was already placing at his path’s destination The Hermit and the Nine of Swords, which she needed, because that is precisely how her story began, when she interrogated a soothsayer to learn the outcome of the war that had kept her for years besieged in a city foreign to her. The Last Judgment and The Tower brought her the news that the gods had long since decreed the fall of Troy. In fact, that fortified and besieged city (The World), which in Astolpho’s story was Paris coveted by the Moors, was seen as Troy by the lady who had been the long war’s prime cause. So here the banquets, resounding with songs and the strumming of lyres (Ten of Cups), were those the Achaeans prepared on the longed-for day of the city’s storming.

At the same time, however, another Queen (the ministering one, of Cups) advanced, in a story of her own, toward the story of Roland, along his same path, beginning with Force and The Hanged Man. So this queen contemplated a fierce brigand (thus, at least, he had been described to her) hanging from an instrument of torture, under The Sun, in the verdict of Justice. She took pity on him, approached, gave him drink (Three of Cups), and realized he was an alert and courteous youth (Page of Clubs).

The Arcana The Chariot, Love, Moon, Fool (which had already been used for Angelica’s dream, Roland’s madness, the journey of the Hippogryph) were now disputed between the soothsayer’s prophecy to Helen of Troy—”A woman, a queen or goddess, will enter in a chariot with the victors, and your Paris will fall in love with her,” which drove Menelaus’s beautiful and adulterous wife to flee by moonlight from the besieged city, concealed in humble dress, accompanied only by the court fool—and the story recounted simultaneously by the other queen, of how, having fallen in love with the prisoner, she set him free that night, urging him to escape, disguised as a vagabond, and then to wait for her to join him, on her royal chariot, in the darkness of the woods.

The two stories then went on, each toward its conclusion, Helen reaching Olympus (The Wheel of Fortune) and presenting herself at the banquet (Cups) of the gods, the other queen waiting in vain in the woods (Clubs) for the man she had freed until the first golden light (Coins) of morning. And as the first, addressing the supreme Zeus (The Emperor), concluded: “Tell the poet (The Juggler) who here in Olympus, blind no longer, sits among the Immortals and arranges his verses outside of time in temporal poems that other poets will sing, that only this alms (Ace of Coins) do I ask of the will of the Celestials (Ace of Swords); let him write this in the poem of my destiny: before Paris can betray her, Helen will give herself to Ulysses in the very belly of the Trojan Horse (Knight of Clubs)!,” the other queen’s fate was no less uncertain, as she heard herself addressed by a splendid woman warrior (Queen of Swords) who was coming toward her at the head of an army: “Queen of the night, the man you have set free is mine: prepare to do battle; war with the armies of the day does not end, among the trees of the woods, before dawn!”

At the same time, we had to keep in mind that Paris, or Troy, besieged in the card of The World, which was also the celestial city of the grave-robber’s story, was now becoming a subterranean city in the story of a fellow who had introduced himself in the sturdy, convivial features of the King of Clubs, and who had reached that point after he had armed himself in a magic wood with a truncheon of extraordinary powers and had followed an unknown warrior with black arms who boasted of his riches (Clubs, Knight of Swords, Coins). In a tavern brawl (Cups), the mysterious traveling companion had decided to gamble the scepter of the city (Ace of Clubs). The fight, with cudgels, turned out in our hero’s favor, whereupon the Stranger said to him: “Here you are then, master of the City of Death. You have defeated the Prince of Discontinuity.” And taking off his mask, he revealed his true countenance (Death), a yellow, noseless skull.

When the City of Death was locked, no one could die any more. A new Age of Gold began: men lavished all on merry-making, crossed swords in harmless brawls, flung themselves unhurt from high towers (Coins, Cups, Swords, Tower). And the graves inhabited by living revelers (The Last Judgment) represented the now-useless cemeteries where the pleasure seekers gathered for their orgies, before the terrified gaze of the angels and of God. So a warning was not long in resounding: “Reopen the gates of Death or the world will become a desert bristling with dry sticks, a mountain of cold metal!” And our hero knelt at the feet of the wrathful Pontiff, in an act of obedience (Four of Clubs, Eight of Clubs, Eight of Coins, The Pope).

“I was that Pope!” another guest seemed to exclaim, presenting himself in the disguise of the Knight of Coins and scornfully throwing down the Four of Coins, which perhaps he meant to signify that he had abandoned the pomp of the papal court to carry the final viaticum to men dying on the field of battle. Death, followed by the Ten of Swords, then represented the expanse of dismembered bodies amid which the aghast Pontiff wandered, at the beginning of a story related in detail by the same cards that had already marked out the love of a warrior and a corpse but now were read by a different code through which the succession Clubs, Devil, Two of Coins, Swords suggested that the Pope, tempted to doubt by the sight of the massacre, was heard to ask himself: “Why do you permit this, God? Why do you allow so many of your souls to be lost?” And from the woods, a voice replied: “There are two of us to share the world (Two of Coins) and souls! It is not up to Him alone to allow or not allow. He has always to settle scores with me!”

The Page of Swords at the end of the strip made it clear that this voice was followed by the apparition of a warrior with a contemptuous manner: “Recognize in me the Prince of Oppositions, and I will make peace reign in the world (Cups); I will begin a New Age of Gold!”

“For a long time this sign has reminded us that the Other has been defeated by the One!” the Pope may have said, answering him with the crossed Two of Clubs.

Or else that card indicated a crossroads. “The paths are two. Choose,” the Enemy said. But in the center of the crossroads the Queen of Swords appeared (formerly the sorceress Angelica or beautiful doomed soul or female captain), to declare: “Stop! Your contest has no sense. Know then that I am the Joyous Goddess of Destruction, who governs the world’s ceaseless dissolution and restoration. In the general massacre the cards are continuously shuffled, and souls fare no better than bodies, which at least enjoy the repose of the grave. An endless war racks the universe up to the very stars of the firmament and spares not even spirits or atoms. In the gilded dust suspended in the air, when a room’s darkness is penetrated by rays of light, Lucretius contemplated battles of impalpable corpuscles, invasions, assaults, tourneys, whirlwinds . . .” (Swords, Star, Coins, Swords).

Surely my own story is also contained in this pattern of cards, my past, present, and future, but I can no longer distinguish it from the others. The forest, the castle, the tarots have brought me to this point, where I have lost my story, confused it in the dust of the tales, become freed of it. What is left me is only the manic determination to complete, to conclude, to make the sums work out. I still have to cover two sides of the quadrangle in the opposite direction, and I advance only out of punctilio, so as not to leave things half-done.

The innkeeper-lord, our host, is not long in telling his tale. We can assume that he is the Page of Cups and that an unusual guest (The Devil) has turned up at his inncastle. With certain customers it is a good practice never to offer free drink, but when he was to pay, the guest said: “Host, in your tavern, everything is contaminated, wines and destinies.”

“Your Honor is not content with my wine?”

“Quite content! The only one who can appreciate all that is mingled, two-faced, is myself. So I wish to give you much more than Two Coins!”

At this point The Star, Arcanum Seventeen, no longer represented Psyche, or the bride emerging from the grave, or a star of the firmament, but only the serving-maid who had been sent to collect the bill and came back, her hands glistening with coins never seen before, as she shouted: “If you only knew! That gentleman! What he did! He emptied one of the Cups on the table and a river of Coins flowed from it!”

“What spell is this?” the innkeeper-lord had exclaimed.

The customer was already at the door. “Among your cups there is now one that looks like the others, but instead is magic. Use this gift in a way that will please me; otherwise, as you have known me as a friend, so I will return to meet you as an enemy!” he said, and vanished.

After thinking it over at length, the lord of the castle had decided to disguise himself as a juggler and go to the capital, to win power by pouring out ringing coins. So then The Juggler (whom we had seen as a Mephistopheles or as a poet) was also the innkeeper-lord who dreamed of becoming Emperor with the shell games of his Cups, and The Wheel (no longer Mill of Gold or Olympus or World of the Moon) represented his intention of overturning the world.

He set forth. But in the woods . . . At this point we had once more to interpret the Arcanum of The Popess as a High Priestess who celebrated a ritual feast in the wood and said to the wayfarer: “Return to the Bacchantes the sacred cup that was stolen from us!” And thus the barefoot maiden, sprinkled with wine, known in the tarots as Temperance, was explained, and so was the elaborate working of the goblet-altar which occupied the position of the Ace of Cups.

At the same time, the gigantic woman who served us wine like an attentive hostess or solicitous chatelaine had also begun a story of her own with three cards, Queen of Clubs, Eight of Swords, Popess. We were led to see The Popess as a convent’s Abbess to whom our storyteller, then a tender schoolgirl, had said, to overcome the terror that reigned among the nuns at the approach of the war: “Let me challenge to a duel (Two of Swords) the captain of the invaders!”

This pupil, in fact, was a skilled swordswoman—as Justice again revealed to us—and at dawn, on the battlefield, her majestic person made such a dazzling appearance (The Sun) that the prince challenged to combat (Knight of Swords) fell in love with her. The wedding banquet (Cups) was celebrated in the palace of the bridegroom’s parents (Empress and King of Coins), whose countenances expressed all their distrust toward that ungainly daughter-in-law. As soon as the bridegroom had to leave again (the moving away of the Knight of Cups), his cruel parents paid (Coins) an assassin to take the bride into the woods (Clubs) and kill her. But then the brute (Force) and The Hanged Man proved to be the same person, the assassin who attacked our lioness and found himself, a little later, tied, head downward, by that robust feminine fighter.

Having eluded this ambush, the heroine concealed herself in the guise of a hostess or castle maidservant, as we now saw her both in person and in the Arcanum of Temperance, pouring out the purest of wines (as the Bacchic motifs of the Ace of Cups assured us). And now she is setting a table for two, awaiting her husband’s return and peering at every movement of the foliage of this wood, at every card drawn from this pack of tarots, every turn of events in this pattern of tales, until the end of the game is reached. Then her hands scatter the cards, shuffle the deck, and begin all over again.





The Tavern

of Crossed

Destinies





The Tavern




We come out of the darkness, no, we enter; outside there is darkness, here something can be seen amid the smoke; the light is smoky, perhaps from candles, but colors can be seen, yellows, blues, on the white, on the table, colored patches, reds, also greens, with black outlines, drawings on white rectangles scattered over the table. There are some clubs, thick branches, trunks, leaves, as outside, before, some swords slashing at us, among the leaves, the ambushes in the darkness where we were lost; luckily we saw a light in the end, a door; there are some gold coins that shine, some cups, this table arrayed with glasses and plates, bowls of steaming soup, tarikards of wine; we are safe but still half-dead with fright; we can tell about it, we would have plenty to tell, each would like to tell the others what happened to him, what he was forced to see, with his own eyes in the darkness, in the silence; here now there is noise, how can I make myself heard, I cannot hear my voice, my voice refuses to emerge from my throat, I have no voice, I do not hear the others’ voices either; noises are heard, I am not deaf after all, I hear bowls scraped, flasks uncorked, a clatter of spoons, chewing, belching; I make gestures to say I have lost the power of speech, the others are making the same gestures, they are dumb, we have all become mute, in the forest; all of us are around this table, men and women, dressed well or poorly, frightened, indeed frightful to see, all with white hair, young and old; I too look at my reflection in one of these mirrors, these cards, my hair too has turned white in sudden fear.

How can I tell about it now that I have lost my power of speech, words, perhaps also memory, how can I tell what was there outside; and once I have remembered, how can I find the words to say it, and how can I utter those words? We are all trying to explain something to the others with gestures, grimaces, all of us like monkeys. Thank God, there are these cards, here on the table, a deck of tarots, the most ordinary kind, the Marseilles tarots as they are called, also known as Bergamasque, or Neapolitan, or Piedmontese, call them what you wish, if they are not the same, they are very like those in village taverns, in gypsy women’s laps, crudely drawn, coarse, but with unexpected details, not really so easy to understand, as if the person who carved these drawings in wood, to print them, had traced them with his clumsy hands from complex models, refined, with who knows what perfectly studied features, and then he went at them with his chisel, haphazardly, not even bothering to understand what he was copying, and afterward he smeared the wooden blocks with ink, and that was that.

We all grab for the cards at once, some of the pictures aligned with other pictures recall to me the story that has brought me here, I try to recognize what happened to me and to show it to the others, who meanwhile are also hunting there among the cards, pointing a finger at one card or another, and nothing fits properly with anything, and we snatch the cards away from one another, and we scatter them over the table.





The Waverer’s Tale




One of us turns over a card, picks it up, looks at it as if he were looking at himself in a mirror. True, the Knight of Cups really seems to be he. It is not only the face, anxious, wide-eyed, with long hair, now white, falling to his shoulders; the resemblance can be noted also in his hands, which he moves over the table as if he had no idea where to put them. There in the card the right hand holds an outsize cup balanced on the palm, and the left barely touches the reins with the fingertips. This reeling posture is communicated also to the horse: you would say he is unable to plant his hoofs firmly on the plowed earth.

Having found that card, the young man seems to recognize a special meaning in all the other cards that come within his reach, and he begins lining them up on the table, as if he were following a thread from one to the other. As, next to an Eight of Cups and a Ten of Clubs, he puts down the Arcanum that, according to the locality, they call Love or The Lover or The Lovers, the sadness to be read in his face suggests a heartache that impelled him to rise from an overheated banquet for a breath of air in the forest. Or actually to desert his own wedding feast, to run off to the woods on the very day of his marriage.

Perhaps there are two women in his life, and he is unable to choose. This is exactly how the drawing portrays him: still blond, between the two rivals, one seizing him by the shoulder and staring at him with a lustful eye, the other rubbing her whole body against him in a languid movement, while he does not know which way to turn. Every time he is about to decide which of the two would be the more suitable bride, he convinces himself he can very well give up the other, and so he is resigned to losing the latter every time he realizes he prefers the former. The only fixed point in this mental vacillation is that he can do without either one, for every choice has an obverse, that is to say a renunciation, and so there is no difference between the act of choosing and the act of renouncing.

Only a journey could release him from this vicious circle: the tarot the young man now puts on the table will surely be The Chariot: the two horses draw the stately vehicle along the rough paths through the forest; the reins are slack, for he habitually lets the animals have their way, so when they reach a crossroads he does not have to make the choice. The Two of Clubs marks the crossing of two roads; the horses start tugging, one this way, one that; the wheels are drawn to such a divergence they seem perpendicular to the road, a sign that the chariot has stopped. Or else, if it is moving, it might as well remain still, as happens to many people before whom the ramps of the most smooth and speedy roads open, flying on high pylons, over valleys, piercing granite mountains, and they are free to go everywhere, and everywhere is always the same. Thus we saw him printed there in the falsely decisive pose, like the master of his fate, a triumphant vehicle-driver; but he bore always within him his divided soul, like the two masks with divergent gaze that he wore on his cloak.

To decide which road to take he could only rely on chance: the Page of Coins depicts the youth as he throws a coin in the air: heads or tails. Perhaps neither; the coin rolls and rolls, then remains erect in a bush, at the foot of an old oak, right in the middle of the two roads. With the Ace of Clubs the youth surely wishes to tell us that, unable to decide whether to continue in one direction or the other, he had no course save to get down from the chariot and climb up a gnarled trunk, among the branches which, with their succession of repeated forks, continue to inflict the torment of choice on him.

He hopes at least that after pulling himself up from one branch to another he will be able to see farther, discover where the roads lead; but the foliage beneath him is dense, the ground is soon out of sight, and if he raises his eyes toward the top of the tree he is blinded by The Sun, whose piercing rays make the leaves gleam with every color, against the light. However, the meaning of those two children seen in the tarot should also be explained: they must indicate that, looking up, the young man has realized he is no longer alone in the tree; two urchins have preceded him, scrambling up the boughs.

They seem twins: identical, barefoot, golden blond. Perhaps at this point the young man spoke, asked: “What are you two doing here?” Or else: “How far is it to the top?” And the twins replied, indicating with confused gesticulation toward something seen on the horizon of the drawing, beneath the sun’s rays: the walls of a city.

But where are these walls located, with respect to the tree? The Ace of Cups portrays, in fact, a city, with many towers and spires and minarets and domes rising above the walls. And also palm fronds, pheasants’ wings, fins of blue moonfish, which certainly jut from the city’s gardens, aviaries, aquariums, among which we can imagine the two urchins, chasing each other and vanishing. And this city seems balanced on top of a pyramid, which could also be the top of the great tree; in other words, it would be a city suspended on the highest branches like a bird’s nest, with hanging foundations like the aerial roots of certain plants which grow at the top of other plants.

As they lay down the cards, the young man’s hands are increasingly slow and uncertain, and we have ample time to follow him with our conjectures, and to ponder silently the questions that must certainly have come into his head as they now come into ours. “What city is this? Is this the City of All? Is this the city where all parts are joined, all choices balanced, where the void between what we expect of life and what we draw is filled?”

But who was there, in the city, whom the youth could question? Let us imagine he has entered through the arched gate in the girdle of the walls, he has stepped into a square with a high stairway at the end, and at the top of this stairway there is seated a personage with royal attributes, an enthroned divinity or crowned angel. (Behind the personage two protuberances can be seen, which could be the back of the throne, but also a pair of wings, awkwardly traced in the drawing.)

“Is this your city?” the youth must have inquired.

“Yours.” He could have received no better answer. “Here you will find what you ask.”

Taken by surprise like this, how could he express a sensible request? Hot from his climb to that height, he could have said only: “I am thirsty.”

And the enthroned angel said: “You need only choose from which well to drink.” And he must have pointed to the two identical wells that open in the deserted square.

You have merely to glance at the youth to realize he feels lost once again. The crowned authority now wields a scales and a sword, the attributes of the angel who keeps watch over decisions and balances, from the summit of the constellation of Libra. Are you then admitted even into the City of All only through a choice and a rejection, accepting one side and rejecting the rest? He might as well leave as he came; but, turning, he sees two Queens looking down from two balconies, facing each other from opposite sides of the square. And lo! he seems to recognize the two women of his eluded choice. They seem to be there on guard, to prevent his leaving the city, for in fact each is holding an unsheathed sword, one with her right hand, the other—surely for symmetry’s sake—with her left. Or else, while there can be no doubts about one queen’s sword, the other’s could also be a goose-quill pen, or closed compasses, or a flute, or a paper-knife, and then the two women would signify two different ways open to him who still has to find himself: the way of passions, which is always a way of action, aggressive, with abrupt shifts, and the way of wisdom, which demands reflection and learning little by little.

In arranging and pointing to the cards, the youth’s hands now hint at vacillation and changes in the order; now the hands are wrung, regretting every tarot already played, which might better have been kept in reserve for another round, now they droop in limp gestures of indifference, to indicate that all tarots and all wells are the same, like the cups which are repeated, identical, in the pack, as, in the world of the uniform, objects and destinies are scattered before you, interchangeable and unchanging, and he who believes he makes decisions is deluded.

How to explain that, with his consuming thirst, neither this well nor that would suffice? What he wants is the cistern where the waters of all wells and all rivers are poured and mingled, the sea depicted in the Arcanum known as The Star or The Stars, where life’s aquatic origins are celebrated as the triumph of mixture and of squandered opulence. A naked goddess takes two jugs containing who knows what juices kept cool for the thirsty (all around there are the yellow dunes of a sun-baked desert), and empties them to water the pebbled shore: and at that instant a growth of saxifrage springs up in the midst of the desert, and among the succulent leaves a blackbird sings; life is the waste of material thrown away, the sea’s cauldron merely repeats what happens within constellations that for billions of years go on pounding atoms in the mortars of their explosions, obvious here even in the milk-colored sky.

In the way the youth slams these cards on the table we can almost hear him shouting: “It’s the sea! It’s the sea I want!”

“And you shall have the sea!” The reply of the astral authority could only announce a cataclysm, the rising of the oceans’ level toward the abandoned cities, lapping the paws of the wolves that have taken refuge on the heights and howl toward The Moon looming over them, while the army of crustaceans advances from the depth of the abysses to reconquer the globe.

A thunderbolt that strikes the top of the tree, breaking every wall and tower of the suspended city, illuminates an even more horrifying sight, for which the youth prepares us, uncovering a card with a slow movement and with terrified eyes. Rising to his feet on his throne, the regal interlocutor changes and becomes unrecognizable: at his back it is not an angelic plumage that opens, but two bat-wings that darken the sky, the impassive eyes have become crossed, oblique, and the crown has sprouted horn branches, the cloak falls to reveal a naked, hermaphroditic body, hands and feet prolonged into talons.

“Why, were you not an angel?”

“I am the angel who dwells in the point where lines fork. Whoever retraces the way of divided things encounters me, whoever descends to the bottom of contradictions runs into me, whoever mingles again what was separated feels my membraned wing brush his cheek!”

At his feet the solar twins have reappeared, transformed into two beings whose features are both human and animal, with horns, tail, feathers, paws, scales, linked to the rapacious character by two long threads or umbilical cords, and it is likewise probable that each of them holds on a leash two other, smaller devils that have remained outside the picture, so that from branch to branch stretches a network of ropes which the wind sways like a great cobweb, amid a flutter of black wings of decreasing size: noctules, owls, hoopoes, moths, hornets, gnats.

The wind, or waves? The lines drawn at the bottom of the card could indicate that the great tide is already engulfing the top of the tree and all vegetation is being dissolved in a swaying of algae and tentacles. This is the answer to the choice of the man who does not choose: now he does indeed have the sea, he plunges into it headlong, swaying among the corals of the depths, Hanged by his feet in the sargassoes that hover half-submerged beneath the ocean’s opaque surface, and his green seaweed hair brushes the steep ocean beds. (Is this then the very card that Madame Sosostris, famous clairvoyante but not very reliable as to nomenclature, in prophesying the private and general destiny of the distinguished Lloyds employee, described as a drowned Phoenician sailor?)

If the only thing he wished was to escape from individual limitation, from categories, roles, to hear the thunder that rumbles in molecules, the mingling of prime and ultimate substances, this then is the path that opens to him through the Arcanum known as The World: Venus dances in the sky, crowned with vegetation, surrounded by incarnations of multiform Zeus; every species and individual and the whole history of the human race are only a random link in a chain of evolutions and mutations.

He has only to conclude the great turn of The Wheel in which animal life evolves and in which you can never say this is the top and this is the bottom, or the even longer turn which passes through decay, the descent to the center of the earth in the deposits of the elements, the awaiting of the cataclysms that shuffle the tarot pack and bring the buried strata to the surface, as in the Arcanum of the final earthquake.

The hands’ trembling, the prematurely white hair were only faint signs of what our hapless neighbor had undergone: in that same night he had been chopped (swords) into his prime elements, he had gone through the craters of volcanoes (cups), through all the eras of the earth, he had risked remaining prisoner of the definitive immobility of crystal (coins), and had reappeared in life through the painful blossoming of the forest (clubs), until he had resumed his own identical human form, in the saddle, the Knight of Coins.

But is this really he or is it rather a double whom he saw coming through the forest, the moment he was restored to himself?

“Who are you?”

“I am the man who was to marry the girl you did not choose, who was to take the other road at the crossing, quench his thirst at the other well. By not choosing, you have prevented my choice.”

“Where are you going?”

“To an inn different from the one you will come upon.”

“Where shall I see you again?”

“Hanging from a gallows different from the one where you will have hanged yourself. Farewell.”





The Tale of the Forest’s Revenge




The tale’s thread is tangled not only because it is difficult to fit one card to another, but also because, for every new card the young man tries to align with the others, ten hands are outstretched to take it from him and insert it in another story each one is constructing, and at a certain point his cards are escaping him in all directions and he has to hold them in place with his hands, his forearms, his elbows, and so he hides them from anyone trying to understand the story he is telling. Luckily, among all those obtrusive hands there is a pair that comes to his aid, helping him keep the cards in line, and since these hands are as big and as heavy as three ordinary hands, and the wrists and arms are proportionately thick, and proportionate also are the strength and determination with which they pound the table, in the end the cards the wavering young man succeeds in keeping together are those remaining under the protection of the unknown huge hands, a protection due not so much to interest in the story of his indecisions as to the chance juxtaposition of some of those cards in which someone has recognized a story that means more to him, namely his own.

Her own. It is a woman, in fact. Because, their dimensions apart, the form of these fingers and hands and wrists and arms is that which distinguishes female fingers, hands, wrists, and arms, those of a plump girl, well shaped; and, in fact, moving up along those limbs, you follow the figure of a gigantic maiden who, until a short time before, was seated amongst us, quite calm; now all of a sudden, overcoming her awe, she has started gesticulating, digging her elbow into people’s stomachs, and knocking her neighbors off the bench.

Our eyes move up to her face, which blushes—whether in shyness or wrath—then down again to the face card of the Queen of Clubs, who bears a considerable resemblance to her, in her solid, rustic features, framed by a rich growth of white hair, and in her curt attitude. She has pointed out that card with a tap that seems the banging of a fist on the table, and the moaning that comes from her sulky lips seems to say:

“Yes, that is I, all right, and these thick clubs are the forest where I was raised by a father who, having given up all hope of anything good from the civilized world, became a Hermit in these woods, to keep me far from the bad influences of human society. I developed my Strength, playing with boars and wolves, and I learned that the forest, though it lives on the constant clawing and devouring of animals and vegetables, is governed by a law: strength unable to control itself in time, whether of bison or man or condor, creates a desert around it where you kick the bucket and then serve as pasture for ants and flies. . . .”

This law, which ancient hunters knew well, though no one now remembers it any more, can be deciphered in the inexorable but restrained movement with which the beautiful tamer wrenches a lion’s jaws open with her fingertips.

Having grown up in intimacy with wild beasts, she has remained wild in the presence of human beings. When she hears a horse’s trot and sees a handsome Knight riding along the paths in the wood, she peeps at him through the bushes, runs off, frightened, then takes some shortcuts so as not to lose sight of him. Now she finds him again, Hanged, his feet bound to a branch by a passing brigand, who empties his pocket to the last penny. The woodland girl does not think twice: she flings herself on the brigand, wielding her club: bones, tendons, joints, cartilege snap like dry twigs. Here we must suppose that she has taken the young man down from the bough and has brought him around, lion-fashion, by licking his face. From a flask she carries over her shoulder, she pours out Two Cups of a beverage whose recipe only she knows: something like fermented juniper juice and sour goat’s milk. The knight introduces himself: “I am the Crown Prince of the Empire, the only son of His Majesty. You have saved my life. Tell me how I can reward you.”

And she says, “Stay a while and play with me,” and she hides among the arbutus bushes. That beverage was a powerful aphrodisiac. He chases her. Quickly the narrator would like to place before our eyes the Arcanum The World, as a bashful hint—”In this game, my maidenhead was soon lost . . .”—but the drawing shows without reticence how her nakedness was revealed to the young man, transfigured in an amorous dance, and how at every turn of this dance he discovered a new merit in her: strong as a lioness, proud as an eagle, maternal as a cow, gentle as an angel.

The prince’s infatuation is confirmed by the following tarot, The Lovers, which also warns us of a tangled situation: the young man proves to be married, and his lawful spouse has no intention of letting him get away from her.

“Legal fetters count for little in the forest: stay here with me and forget the court, its etiquette, and its intrigue.” The girl must have made this proposal, or one equally sensible, to him; for she does not consider that princes can have principles.

“Only The Pope can release me from my first marriage. You wait here for me. I shall go, deal with the matter, and return at once.” And, climbing onto his Chariot, he sets off without even looking back, giving her a modest allowance (Three Coins).

Abandoned, after a few cycles of The Stars, she is seized by labor pains. She drags herself to the shore of a stream. The wild forest animals know well how to give birth unaided, and she has learned from them. She brings into the light of The Sun a pair of twins so sturdy they can already stand on their own feet.

“I shall present myself with my children to ask Justice of The Emperor in person, who will recognize me as the true wife of his heir and the mother of his descendants,” and with this intent she sets off for the capital.

On and on she goes, and the forest never ends. She encounters a man who runs off like a Fool, pursued by wolves.

“Where do you think you are going, silly girl? No cities, no empire exists any longer! Roads no longer lead from anywhere to anywhere else! Look!”

The yellow and stunted grass and the sand of the desert cover the asphalt and the sidewalks of the city, jackals howl on the dunes, in the palaces abandoned beneath The Moon the windows stand open like hollow eye sockets, rats and scorpions spread from basements and cellars.

And yet the city is not dead: the machines, the engines, the turbines continue to hum and vibrate, every Wheel’s cogs are caught in the cogs of other wheels, trains run on tracks and signals on wires; and no human is there any longer to send or receive, to charge or discharge. The machines, which have long known they could do without men, have finally driven them out; and after a long exile, the wild animals have come back to occupy the territory wrested from the forest: foxes and martens wave their soft tails over the control panels starred with manometers and levers and gauges and diagrams; badgers and dormice luxuriate on batteries and magnetos. Man was necessary; now he is useless. For the world to receive information from the world and enjoy it, now computers and butterflies suffice.

Thus ends the vengeance of the terrestrial forces released in chain explosions of tornadoes and typhoons. Then the birds, already thought extinct, multiply and swarm from the four cardinal points with deafening screeches. When the human race, which has taken refuge in holes underground, tries to emerge again, it sees the sky darkened by a thick blanket of wings. People recognize the day of Judgment as it is shown in the tarots. And that another card’s announcement has also come true: the day will come when a feather will knock down the tower of Nimrod.





The Surviving Warrior’s Tale




Even if the girl is the sort who knows her own mind, her tale is not necessarily easier to follow than another. For the cards conceal more things than they tell, and as soon as a card says more, other hands immediately try to pull it in their direction, to fit it into a different story. One perhaps begins to tell a tale on his own, with cards that seem to belong solely to him, and all of a sudden the conclusion comes in a rush, overlapping that of other stories in the same catastrophic pictures.

Here, for example, is a man who looks exactly like an officer on active service, and he has begun by recognizing himself in the Knight of Clubs; in fact; he has passed the card around for all to see what a handsomely outfitted mount he was riding when he left the barracks that morning and what a well-fitting uniform he was wearing, garnished with shining plates of armor, with a gardenia in the buckle of a greave. His genuine appearance—he seems to say—was that, and if we see him now dented and lamed, it is all due to the frightful adventure he is preparing to narrate.

But if you look carefully at that portrait, you see it also contains elements that correspond to his present appearance: white hair, raving eye, the lance broken, reduced to a stub. Unless it is not a lance stump (especially since he was holding it in his left hand) but a rolled-up sheet of parchment, a message he had been ordered to deliver, perhaps crossing the enemy lines. Let us suppose that he is a staff officer and has been ordered to reach the headquarters of his sovereign or commander, to hand to him a dispatch on which the battle’s outcome depends.

The fighting rages; the knight ends up in the midst of the fray; with their swords the opposing armies hack a path, one into the other’s midst as in a Ten of Swords. There are two recommended ways of fighting in battle: either plunge into the thick of things, pell-mell, or else choose among the enemies one enemy who suits you and give him a good going-over. Our staff officer sees coming toward him a Knight of Swords distinguished from the others by the elegance of his personal and equine equipment: his armor, unlike the others seen around, pieced together with oddments, is complete down to the most trifling detail and is all one color from helmet to greaves: a periwinkle blue, against which the gilded breastplate and shin guards stand out. On his feet he wears slippers of red damask like the horse’s saddlecloth. His face, though masked with sweat and dust, shows fine features. He holds his great sword in his left hand, a detail not to be overlooked: left-handed adversaries are to be feared. But our narrator also holds his club in his left hand, so both are left-handed and both are to be feared, opponents worthy of each other.

The Two Swords, entwined amid a tumult of twigs, acorns, little leaves, budding flowers, indicate that the pair has gone off to one side for single combat, and with downward slashes and wide swings of their swords, they have pruned the surrounding vegetation. At first it seems to our hero that the periwinkle knight’s arm is faster than it is strong, and he has only to plunge at him head-long to overpower him, but the latter rains blows on him with the flat of his sword, enough to drive him into the earth like a nail. The horses are already kicking the air, turned on their backs like tortoises on the ground sown with swords that are twisted like snakes, and still the periwinkle warrior persists, wily as a snake, carapaced as a tortoise. The more furious the duel waxes, the greater the display of virtuosity, the pleasure of discovering in oneself or in the enemy new, unexpected resources: and thus into the constant pounding a dance’s grace is gradually introduced.

As he duels, our hero has already forgotten his mission, when high over the forest a trumpet sounds resembling that of the Angel of Judgment in the Arcanum known as The Judgment and also as The Angel: it is the oliphant that calls the faithful followers of The Emperor together. Certainly a grave danger threatens the imperial army: with no further delay the officer must hasten to his sovereign’s support. But how can he break off a duel that so engages his honor and his pleasure? He must bring it to an end as quickly as possible, and he starts to regain the distance he moved from his enemy at the trumpet’s blast. But where is he, the periwinkle knight? That moment of bewilderment was enough for the adversary to disappear. The officer charges into the woods to follow the alarm summons and at the same time to pursue the fugitive.

He forces his way through the thicket, among clubs and dried brush and stakes. From card to card, the tale advances in brusque leaps which have somehow to be graduated. The wood ends suddenly. The open country stretches out all around, silent; it seems deserted in the evening’s shadow. On closer inspection, you can see that it is crammed with men, a disorderly throng that covers it, leaving no corner clear. But it is a flattened crowd, as if smeared over the surface of the ground: none of these men are standing, they lie on their bellies or on their backs, unable to raise their heads higher than the trampled blades of grass.

Some, which Death has not stiffened, are groping as if learning to swim in the mire black with their blood. Here and there a hand burgeons, it opens and closes, as if seeking the wrist from which it was severed, a foot tries to take some light steps no longer with a body to support above the ankles, heads of pages and sovereigns shake their long locks flowing over their eyes, or try to straighten the crooked crown on the white hair and succeed only in digging their chins into the dust and chewing gravel.

“What ruination has fallen upon the imperial army?” This is probably the question the knight asked the first living being he encountered: someone so filthy and tattered that from the distance he resembled the Fool tarot, while, seen closer, he has proved to be a wounded, limping soldier, fleeing from the field of slaughter.

In our officer’s mute tale the voice of this survivor sounds discordant, hoarse, mumbling in a dialect hard to understand some broken phrases like: “Don’t ask dumb questions, Lieutenant! If you’ve got legs, run! The shoe’s on the other foot! That army came from God knows where. Never saw them before, wild devils that they are! Headlong, here they fell on us out of nowhere, and we were soon food for the flies! Protect yourself, Lieutenant, and clear out!” And the wretched soldier is already moving off, showing his private parts through his torn trousers, sniffed by stray dogs as their brother in stink, dragging after him the bundle of loot collected from the corpses’ pockets.

It takes more to dissuade our knight from going forward. Sidestepping the jackals’ howl, he searches the edges of the field of death. In the light of The Moon he sees a gilded shield and a silver Sword glisten, hanging from a tree. He recognizes his enemy’s arms.

From the next card a spurt of water is felt. A stream flows there below, among the reeds. The unknown warrior is standing on the shore and is taking off his armor. Our officer surely cannot attack him at that moment: he hides, to wait till the other is again armed and able to defend himself.

From the plates of the armor white, tender limbs emerge, from the helmet a cascade of dark hair falls along the back to the point where it curves. That warrior has the skin of a maiden, the flesh of a lady, the bosom and womb of a queen: it is a woman who beneath The Stars is crouched over the stream, performing her evening ablutions.

As each new card placed on the table explains or corrects the meaning of the preceding cards, so this discovery confounds the knight’s passions and intentions: if, before, his emulation, envy, and chivalrous respect for his brave enemy conflicted with his urgency to win, avenge, overwhelm, now the shame of having been held at bay by a maiden’s arm, the haste to re-establish his outraged supremacy as a male, clash with the longing to declare himself vanquished at once, captured by that arm, by that armpit, by that breast.

The first of these new impulses is the stronger: if the roles of man and woman are shuffled, then the cards must immediately be dealt again, the order tampered with must be restored, for outside it a man no longer knows who he is or what is expected of him. That sword is not a woman’s attribute, it is a usurpation. The knight would never take advantage of an adversary of his own sex, surprising him unarmed, and still less would he steal from him secretly, but now he crawls among the bushes, approaches the hanging weapons, grasps the sword with a furtive hand, takes it from the tree, and runs off. “War between man and woman has no rules, no loyalty,” he thinks, and he does not yet know, to his misfortune, how right he is.

He is about to disappear into the woods when he feels himself seized by the arms and legs, bound, Hanged head down. From every clump of bushes on the shore, naked bathing girls have sprung forth, with long legs, like the girl who rushes forward in the card of The World through a gap in the boughs. They are a regiment of gigantic women warriors who have swarmed along the water to refresh themselves after the battle, and to regain their Strength, which is like the swift lioness’s. In a second they are all upon him, seizing him, flinging him down, tearing him from one another, pinching him, pulling him this way and that, probing him with fingers, tongues, nails, teeth, no, not like that, you girls are mad, leave me alone, what are you doing to me now, not there, stop, you’ll ruin me, ouch, ouch, have mercy.

Left there for dead, he is succored by a Hermit who, in the light of his lantern, roams over the scenes of the battle, composing the remains of the dead and medicating the wounds of the mutilated. The holy man’s words can be surmised from the last cards the narrator places on the table, with trembling hand: “I do not know if it was better for you to survive, O soldier. Defeat and slaughter do not befall only the armies of your flag: the host of the avenging Amazons sweeps away and massacres regiments and empires, spreads over the continents of the globe, for ten thousand years subject to masculine dominion, however fragile. The precarious armistice which kept man and woman confronting each other within the family has broken down: wives, sisters, daughters, mothers no longer recognize us as fathers, brothers, sons, husbands, but only as enemies, and all hasten, weapons in hand, to swell the army of the avengers. The proud strongholds of our sex collapse one by one; no man is spared; those whom they do not kill, they castrate; only a few, chosen as drones for the hive, are granted a reprieve, but they can expect even more atrocious tortures to quell any desire of boasting. For the man who thought he was Man there is no salvation. Vindictive queens will rule for the next millennia.”





The Tale of the Vampires’ Kingdom




Only one among us does not appear frightened even by the most dire cards; indeed he seems to enjoy a curt familiarity with Arcanum Thirteen. And since he is a burly man much like the one seen in the Page of Clubs, and in arranging the cards in line he seems to be toiling at his everyday job, mindful of the regularity of the expanse of rectangles separated by narrow paths, it is natural to think that the piece of wood on which he is leaning in the picture is the handle of a spade sunk into the earth and that he is a gravedigger by profession.

In the uncertain light the cards describe a nocturnal landscape, the Cups are arrayed like urns, caskets, graves among the nettles, the Swords have a metallic echo like shovels or spades against the leaden lids, the Clubs are black like crooked crosses, the gold Coins glitter like will-o’-the-wisps. As soon as a cloud discloses the Moon, a howling of jackals rises as they scratch furiously at the edges of the graves and fight with scorpions and tarantulas over their putrid feast.

In this nocturnal setting we can imagine a King who advances, puzzled, accompanied by his jester or court dwarf (we have the cards of the King of Swords and the Fool, which fill the bill perfectly), and we can guess a dialogue between them, which the gravedigger overhears. What is the King looking for at this hour? The card of the Queen of Cups suggests he is on his wife’s trail; the jester has seen her leave the palace stealthily, and, half-joking, half in earnest, he has convinced the sovereign to follow her. Mischief-maker that he is, the dwarf suspects a Love intrigue; but the King is sure that anything his wife does can bear the light of the Sun: it is her charity work with abandoned children that keeps her constantly on the go.

The King is an optimist by vocation: in his realm everything proceeds for the best, Coins circulate and are well invested, Cups of abundance are offered to the festive thirst of a prodigal custom, the Wheel of the great mechanism turns by its own power day and night, and there is a Justice stern and rational like that seen in its card with the set expression of a clerk behind her window. The city he has constructed is many-faceted like a crystal, or like the Ace of Cups, pierced by the cheese grater of the skyscrapers’ windows, the pulleys of the elevators, auto-coronated by the superhighways, with lots of parking space, burrowed by the luminous anthill of the underground lines, a city whose spires dominate the clouds and whose miasmas’ dark wings are buried in the bowels of the earth so as not to dull the view of the great panes of glass and the chromed metals.

The jester, on the other hand, every time he opens his mouth, between a gibe and a prank, sows doubts, denigrating rumors, anxieties, alarms: for him the great mechanism is driven by infernal beasts, and the black wings that sprout beneath the cup-city suggest a snare that threatens it from within. The King has to play along: does he not give the Fool a salary, deliberately to have himself contradicted and teased? It is an ancient and wise custom at courts for the Fool or Jester or Poet to perform his task of upsetting and deriding the values on which the sovereign bases his own rule, to show him that every straight line conceals a crooked obverse, every finished product a jumble of ill-fitting parts, every logical discourse a blah-blah-blah. And yet from time to time these cranks, wiles, quips, jests arouse a vague uneasiness in the King: this too is surely foreseen, actually guaranteed in the contract between King and Jester, and yet it is a little disturbing all the same, and not only because the only way to make the most of an uneasiness is to be uneasy, but precisely because the King really does become ill at ease.

Like now, when the Fool has led the King into the forest where all of us were lost. “I had no idea forests this thick were still left in my kingdom,” the monarch must have remarked, “and at this point, with the things they are saying against me, how I prevent the leaves from breathing oxygen through their pores and digesting light in their green sap, I can only rejoice.”

And the Fool says: “If I were Your Majesty, I should not rejoice too much. It is not outside the illuminated metropolis that the forest spreads its shadows, but within: in the heads of your subjects, consequential and executive.”

“Are you insinuating that something escapes my control, Fool?”

“That is what we shall see.”

The forest’s thickness is lessening, with room for paths of turned earth, rectangular pits, a whiteness as of mushrooms peeping from the ground. With horror we see from the thirteenth tarot that the underbrush is fertilized with half-withered corpses and fleshless bones.

“Why, where have you brought me, Fool? This is a cemetery!”

And the Fool says, pointing to the invertebrate fauna feeding in the graves: “Here a monarch reigns, mightier than you: His Majesty the Worm!”

“I have never seen in my territory a place where the order leaves so much to be desired. What idiot is on duty here?”

“I am, Your Majesty, at your service.” And this is the moment when the gravedigger makes his entrance and begins his speech. “To suppress the thought of death the citizens hide the corpses down here, helter-skelter. But then, suppress as they will, they think about it again, and they come back to see if the corpses are sufficiently buried, if the dead, being dead, are really something different from the living, because otherwise the living would not be so sure they are alive, am I right? And so, what with burials and exhumations, digging and covering and stirring around, I’m kept busy.” And the gravedigger spits on his hands and starts using his spade again.

Our attention shifts to another card, which seems to want to remain unobtrusive, The Popess, and we indicate it to our neighbor with an interrogative gesture which could correspond to a question asked the gravedigger by the King, who has glimpsed a figure hooded in a nun’s mantle, crouching among the graves. “Who is that old woman rummaging in the cemetery?”

“God save us! At night a nasty tribe of women roams about here,” the gravedigger must have answered, making the sign of the cross, “experts in philters and books of spells, seeking the ingredients for their witchcraft.”

“Let us follow her and observe her behavior.”

“Not I, Your Majesty!” At this point, the Jester must have drawn back with a shudder. “And I beseech you, give her a wide berth!”

“I must find out, nevertheless, to what extent decrepit superstitions are preserved in my kingdom.” You can swear by the King’s stubborn character: the gravedigger leads, and he follows.

In the Arcanum called The Star we see the woman take off her cloak and her nun’s veil. She is not old at all; she is beautiful; she is naked. The moonlight flickers with starry glints and reveals that the cemetery’s nocturnal visitor resembles the Queen. First it is the King who recognizes his wife’s body, the delicate pear-shaped breasts, the soft shoulders, the generous thighs, the broad and oblong abdomen; then as soon as she raises her brow and shows her face, framed by the heavy hair loose over her shoulders, we too gape: if it were not for her ecstatic expression, which is surely not that of the official portraits, she would be absolutely identical with the Queen.

“How do these foul sorceresses dare assume the appearance of well-bred and exalted people?” This, and no other, must be the reaction of the King, who, in order to dispel any suspicion of his wife, is ready to grant witches a certain number of supernatural powers, including that of transforming themselves at will. He must have promptly rejected an alternative explanation which would better fulfill the demands of verisimilitude (“My wife, poor thing, in her nervous condition, now is afflicted also with sleepwalking!”), seeing the laborious tasks to which the presumed somnambulist devotes herself: kneeling at the edge of a pit, she anoints the earth with murky philters (unless the implements she holds in her hand are to be interpreted actually as acetylene torches scattering sparks, to melt the lead seals of a coffin).

Whatever the operation being performed, here it is a question of a grave being opened, a scene that another tarot foresees for the day of Judgment at the end of time, and which instead is being anticipated by the hand of a frail lady. With the help of Two Clubs and a rope, the witch extracts from the pit a body Hanged by the feet. It is a man’s, apparently well preserved; thick almost blue-black hair falls from the pale skull; the eyes are wide as if in violent death; the lips are clenched over the long and sharp canine teeth, which the sorceress bares with a caressing gesture.

In the midst of such horror a detail does not escape us: just as the witch is a double of the Queen, so the corpse and the King are as like as two drops of water. The only one not to notice it is the King himself, who utters a compromising exclamation: “Witch . . . vampire . . . and adulteress!” Does he then admit that the witch and his wife are the same person? Or does he perhaps think that, assuming the Queen’s appearance, the witch must also respect her obligations? Perhaps the knowledge of being betrayed with his own Doppelgänger could console him, but no one has the nerve to tell him.

At the bottom of the grave something indecent is going on: the witch has bent over the corpse like a brooding hen; now the dead man becomes erect as the Ace of Clubs; like the Page of Cups he lifts to his lips a goblet the witch has offered him; as in the Two of Cups they drink a toast, raising glasses reddish with fresh, unclotted blood.

“My metallic and aseptic kingdom is then still the pasture of vampires, that foul and feudal sect!” The King’s cry must be along this line, while his hair, in clumps, stands up on his head, then falls back in place, turned white. The metropolis which he has always believed compact and transparent as a cup carved from rock crystal proves porous and gangrenous like an old cork stuck there, haphazardly, to plug the breach in the damp and infected boundary of the kingdom of the dead.

“I must tell you”—and this explanation can come only from the gravedigger—”on nights of the solstice and the equinox, that sorceress goes to the grave of her husband, whom she herself killed, she digs him up, restores life to him, nourishing him from her own veins, and copulates with him in the great sabbath of bodies that feed their worn arteries on others’ blood and warm their perverse and polymorphous pudenda.”

The tarots depict two versions of this evil rite, so disparate they might seem the work of two different hands: one, crude, strains to represent an execrable figure, at once man, woman, and bat, named The Devil; the other, all festoons and garlands, celebrates the reconciliation of terrestrial forces with those of Heaven, symbolizing the totality of The World through the dance of a sorceress or nymph, naked and rejoicing. (But the engraver of the two tarots could be the same individual, a clandestine adept of a nocturnal cult, who sketched with rough lines the bogey of the Devil to mock the ignorance of exorcists and inquisitors, and lavished his ornamental skills on the allegory of his secret faith.)

“Tell me, my good fellow, how can I free my lands from this scourge?” the King must have asked, and, immediately seized once more by a bellicose impulse (the swords’ cards are always ready to remind him that the superior strength is on his side), he may have suggested: “I could easily bring out my army, trained in the strategy of encirclement and pressure, in mercilessly using sword and fire, razing to the ground, leaving not a blade of grass, a moving leaf, a living soul. . . .”

“Your Majesty, that would be a mistake,” the gravedigger interrupts him; in his nights at the cemetery he must have seen all sorts of unimaginable things. “When the sabbath is caught by the first ray of the rising sun, all the witches and the vampires, incubi and succubi, take flight, some transforming themselves into noctules, some into other bats, some into still other species of Chiroptera. In these guises, as I have had occasion to remark, they lose their usual invulnerability. At that moment, with this hidden trap, we shall capture the sorceress.”

“I have faith in what you say, my good man. To work, then!”

Everything goes according to the gravedigger’s plan: at least this is what we surmise from the way the King’s hand rests on the mysterious Arcanum of The Wheel, which can designate the entire whirl of zoomorphous specters, or the trap set up with makeshift materials (the sorceress has fallen into it under the form of a repulsive crowned bat, along with two lemurs, her succubi, spinning in the vortex with no avenue of escape), just as it can also signify the launching ramp where the King has encapsulated his infernal prey to hurl it into an orbit with no return, to expel it from the field of Earth’s gravity where everything you throw into the air falls back on your head, perhaps to unload it on the no man’s lands of The Moon, which has too long governed the whims of werewolves, the generations of mosquitoes, menstruations, and yet claims to remain uncontaminated, clean, pure. The narrator contemplates with anxious gaze the curve that binds the Two of Coins as if he were examining the Earth-Moon trajectory, the only way that occurs to him for a radical expulsion of the incongruous from his horizon, provided that Selene, fallen from the pomp of goddess, will resign herself to the rank of celestial garbage can.

A jolt. The night is rent by a flash of lightning, high over the forest, toward the luminous city which at that instant vanishes in the darkness, as if the thunderbolt had fallen on the royal castle, beheading the highest Tower that scrapes the sky of the metropolis, or a sudden change of tension in the overloaded circuits of the Great Power Plant had darkened the world in the blackout.

“Short circuit, long night,” a proverb of ill augury returns to the mind of the gravedigger and to all of us, imagining ourselves (like Arcanum One, known as The Juggler) the engineers who at that moment are desperately dismantling the great Mechanical Brain to discover the fault in the confusion of springs, spools, electrodes, odds and ends.

The same cards in this tale are read and reread with different meanings; the narrator’s hand shakes convulsively and points again to The Tower and The Hanged Man as if inviting us to recognize in an evening newspaper’s blurred telephotos the shots of an atrocious news item: a woman who falls from a dizzying height into the void along the skyscrapers’ façades. In the first of these two pictures the fall is well rendered in the groping hands, the reversed skirt, the simultaneity of the double spinning image; the second, a close-up on the body that, before being crushed on the ground, is caught by the feet in some wires, explains the reason of the power failure.

And so we are able to reconstruct mentally the awful event with the breathless voice of the Fool, who overtakes the King: “The Queen! The Queen! She was falling headlong! Glowing! You know what a meteor looks like? She is about to open her wings! No! her paws are bound! Down! Head first! She is caught in the wires and is hanging there! At the height of the high tension! She thrashes, crackles, slams! She kicks the bucket! The royal membrane of our beloved Queen! She swings there, croaked. . . .”

A tumult rises. “The Queen is dead ! Our beloved Sovereign! She jumped from the balcony! The King killed her! We must avenge her!” People hasten from all sides, on foot and on horseback, armed with swords, clubs, shields, and they set out cups of poisoned blood as bait. “The vampires did it! The kingdom is in the grip of the vampires! The King is a vampire! We must capture him!”





Two Tales of Seeking and Losing




The tavern’s customers jostle one another around the table, which has become covered with cards, as they labor to extract their stories from the melee of the tarots, and the more the stories become confused and disjointed, the more the scattered cards find their place in an orderly mosaic. Is this pattern only the result of chance, or is one of us patiently putting it together?

There is an elderly man, for example, who maintains his meditative calm in the midst of the turmoil, and each time, before putting down a card, he studies it as if absorbed in an operation whose successful outcome is not certain, a combination of trivial elements from which, however, a surprising result may emerge. The trim professorial white beard, the grave gaze in which there is a hint of uneasiness, are some of the features he shares with the picture of the King of Coins. This portrait of himself, along with the cards of Cups and gold Coins seen around him, could define him as an alchemist, who has spent his life investigating the combinations of the elements and their metamorphoses. In the alembics and phials he is being handed by the Page of Cups, his famulus or assistant, he examines the bubbling of liquids thick as urine, colored by reagents in clouds of indigo or cinnabar, from which the molecules of the king of metals are to be detached. But the expectation is vain; what remains in the bottom of the vessels is only lead.

It is known to all, or at least it should be, that if the alchemist seeks the secret of gold out of desire for riches his experiments fail: he must instead free himself of all egoism, all personal limitations, become one with the powers that move in the heart of things, and the first real transformation, which is of himself, will be duly followed by others. Having devoted his best years to this Great Work, our elderly neighbor, now that he finds a deck of tarots in his hand, wants to compose again an equivalent of the Great Work, arranging the cards in a square in which, from top to bottom, from left to right, and vice versa, all stories can be read, his own included. But when he seems to have succeeded in deploying the stories of the others, he realizes his own story has been lost.

He is not the only one who seeks in the succession of the cards the path of a change within himself that can be transmitted externally. There is also another, who, with the beautiful heedlessness of youth, feels he recognizes himself in the boldest warrior figure of the whole deck, the Knight of Swords, and he confronts the most cutting of Swords cards and the sharpest of Clubs to reach his goal. But he has to take a roundabout route (as the serpentine sign of the Two of Coins indicates), defying (Two of Swords) the infernal powers (The Devil) called up by Merlin the Magician (The Juggler) in the forest of Broceliande (Seven of Clubs), if he wants finally to be allowed to sit at the Round Table (Ten of Cups) of King Arthur (King of Swords) in the place no knight so far has been worthy of occupying.

If you look carefully, the destination for both the alchemist and the knight-errant should be the Ace of Cups which, for the one, contains phlogiston or the philosopher’s stone or the elixir of long life, and for the other the talisman guarded by the Fisher King, the mysterious vessel whose first poet lacked time—or else was unwilling—to explain it to us; and thus, since then, rivers of ink have flown in conjectures about the Grail, still contended between the Roman religion and the Celtic. (Perhaps the Champagne troubadour wanted precisely this: to keep alive the battle between The Pope and the Druid-Hermit. There is no better place to keep a secret than in an unfinished novel.)

So then the problem that these two companions of ours wanted to solve, arranging the cards around the Ace of Cups, was at once the Great Work of Alchemy and the Quest for the Grail. In the same cards, one after the other, both can recognize the stages of their Art or Adventure: in The Sun, the star of gold or the innocence of the warrior youth; in The Wheel, perpetual motion or the spell of the forest; in Judgment, death and resurrection (of metals and of the soul) or the heavenly call.

As things stand, the two stories constantly risk stumbling over each other, if the mechanism is not made quite clear. The alchemist is the man who, to achieve transformations of matter, tries to make his soul become as unchangeable and pure as gold; but there is the instance of a Doctor Faust, who inverts the alchemist’s rules, makes the soul an object of exchange, and thus hopes nature will become incorruptible and it will no longer be necessary to seek gold because all elements will be equally precious: the world is gold, and gold is the world. In the same way a knight-errant is one who submits his actions to an absolute and severe moral law, so that natural law can maintain abundance on earth with absolute freedom; but let us try to imagine a Perceval-Parzival-Parsifal who inverts the rule of the Round Table, knightly virtues in him will be involuntary, they will come forth as a gift of nature, like the colors of butterflies’ wings, and while performing his exploits with dazed nonchalance, he will perhaps succeed in subduing nature to his will, in possessing the knowledge of the world like an object, in becoming magician and thaumaturge, in healing the wound of the Fisher King, and in restoring green sap to the wasteland.

The mosaic of cards that we are watching, fixed here, is therefore the Work of the Quest that one would like to conclude without work or search. Doctor Faust has wearied of having the instantaneous metamorphoses of metals depend on the slow transformations that take place within himself, he doubts the wisdom accumulated in the solitary life of a Hermit, he is disappointed in the powers of his art as he is in this dawdling over the tarot combinations. At that moment a thunderbolt illuminates his little cell at the top of The Tower. A personage appears before him with a broad-brimmed hat, such as the students wear at Wittenberg, a wandering clerk perhaps, or a charlatan Juggler, a mountebank at a fair, who has laid out on a stand a laboratory of ill-assorted jars.

“Do you believe you can counterfeit my art?” So the true alchemist must have addressed the impostor. “What messes are you stirring in your pots?”

“The broth that was at the origin of The World,” the stranger may have replied, “whence crystals and plants took their form, and the species of animals and the race of Homo Sapiens!” And what he names then appears in the transparent material boiling in an incandescent crucible, just as we now observe it in Arcanum XXI. In this card, which has the highest number of all the tarots and is the one that counts most in players’ scoring, a naked goddess framed in myrtle is flying, Venus perhaps; the four figures around her can be recognized as more modern devout emblems, but perhaps they are only a prudent disguise of other apparitions less incompatible with the triumph of the goddess in the middle, perhaps centaurs, sirens, harpies, gorgons, who supported the world before the authority of Olympus had subdued it, or perhaps dinosaurs, mastodons, pterodactyls, mammoths, the attempts nature made before resigning herself—we do not know for how much longer—to human dominion. And there are also those who, in the central figure, see not Venus but the Hermaphrodite, symbol of the souls that reach the center of the world, the culminating point of the itinerary the alchemist must follow.

“And can you then make gold?” the doctor must have asked, to which the other must have replied, “Look!” giving him a brief vision of strongboxes brimming with homemade ingots.

“And can you restore my youth?”

Now the tempter shows him the Arcanum of Love, in which the story of Faust is mingled with that of Don Juan Tenorio, also surely concealed within the network of the tarots.

“What do you want in exchange for the secret?”

The card of the Two of Cups is a memorandum of the secret of making gold; and it can be read as the spirits of Sulphur and Mercury which are separated, or as the union of the Sun and the Moon, or the conflict between the Stable and the Volatile, recipes to be found in all the treatises, but to make them work you can spend a whole life blowing on stoves without getting anywhere.

Our neighbor seems to be deciphering in the tarots a story still taking place within himself. But for the moment it does not really look as if we can expect any unforeseen developments: the Two of Coins with rapid, graphic efficacy is indicating an exchange, a barter, a dout-des; and since the counter-item in this exchange can only be the soul of our companion, it is convenient for us to recognize an ingenuous allegory of it in the fluid, winged apparition of the Arcanum Temperance; and if it is traffic in souls that the shady sorcerer is concerned with, there are no doubts about his identity as The Devil.

With the help of Mephistopheles, Faust’s every wish is promptly satisfied. Or, rather, to tell it straight, Faust receives the equivalent in gold of what he wishes.

“And are you not content?”

“I believed wealth was different, the multiple, the changing, and I see nothing but pieces of uniform metal which come and go and are accumulated, and serve only to multiply themselves, always the same.”

Everything his hands touch is transformed into gold. So the story of Doctor Faust mingles also with that of King Midas, in the card of the Ace of Coins, which portrays the terrestrial globe turned into a sphere of solid gold, made arid in its abstraction into money, inedible and unlivable.

“Do you already regret having signed the pact with the Devil?”

“No, the mistake was to barter a single soul for a single metal. Only if Faust compromises himself with many devils at once will he save his plural soul, find wisps of gold at the bottom of plastic matter, see Venus constantly reborn on the shores of Cyprus, dispelling oil slicks, detergent’s foam. . . .”

The Arcanum XVII, which can conclude the story of the doctor of alchemy, can also begin the story of the adventurous champion, illustrating his outdoor birth under the stars. Son of an unknown father and of a deposed and fugitive queen, Parsifal bears with him the mystery of his origin. To prevent his knowing more, his mother (who must have had her own good reasons) has taught him never to ask questions, has brought him up in solitude, exempting him from the hard novitiate of chivalry. But knights-errant roam even in those rough moors, and the boy, without asking anything, joins up with them, takes arms, climbs into the saddle, and tramples his over-protective mother beneath his horse’s hoofs.

Son of a guilty cohabitation, matricide unawares, soon involved in an equally forbidden love, Parsifal runs lightly through the world, in perfect innocence. Ignorant of everything that must be learned if one is going to get ahead in this world, he behaves according to the rules of chivalry because that is how he is made. And radiant with bright ignorance he travels through localities weighed down by a dark awareness.

Wastelands stretch out in the tarot of The Moon. On the shore of a lake of dead water there is a castle on whose Tower a curse has fallen. Amfortas, the Fisher King, lives there, and we see him here, old and infirm, pressing a wound that refuses to heal. Until that wound is cured, the wheel of transformations will be still, the wheel that passes from the light of the sun to the green of the leaves and to the gaiety of the equinox festivities in spring.

Perhaps the sin of King Amfortas is a cluttered wisdom, a saddened knowledge, kept perhaps at the bottom of the vessel Parsifal sees carried in procession up the steps of the castle, and he would like to know what it is, but still he remains silent. Parsifal’s strong point is that he is so new to the world and so occupied with the fact of being in the world that it never occurs to him to ask questions about what he sees. And yet one question of his would suffice, a first question that releases the question of everything in the world that has never asked anything, and then the deposit of centuries collected at the bottom of pots in excavations is dissolved, the eras crushed among the telluric strata begin to flow again, the future recovers the past, the pollen of the abundant seasons buried for millennia in peat bogs starts drifting once more, rising on the dust of the years of drought. . . .

I do not know for how long (hours or years) Faust and Parsifal have been intent on retracing their routes, card after card, on the table of the tavern. But every time they bend over the tarots, their story reads another way, undergoes corrections, variants, affected by the moods of the day and the train of thoughts, oscillating between two poles: all and nothing.

“The world does not exist,” Faust concludes when the pendulum reaches the other extreme, “there is not an all, given all at once: there is a finite number of elements whose combinations are multiplied to billions of billions, and only a few of these find a form and a meaning and make their presence felt amid a meaningless, shapeless dust cloud; like the seventy-eight cards of the tarot deck in whose juxtapositions sequences of stories appear and are then immediately undone.”

Whereas this would be the (still temporary) conclusion of Parsifal: “The kernel of the world is empty, the beginning of what moves in the universe is the space of nothingness, around absence is constructed what exists, at the bottom of the Grail is the Tao,” and he points to the empty rectangle surrounded by the tarots.





I Also Try to Tell My Tale




I open my mouth, I try to articulate words, I grunt, this would be the moment for me to tell my tale, it is obvious that the cards of these other two are also the cards of my story, the story that has brought me here, a series of nasty encounters that is perhaps only a series of missed encounters.

To begin, I have to attract attention to the card called the King of Clubs, in which you see a seated person who, if no one else claims him, could very well be me: especially since he is holding an implement with the point downward as I am doing at this moment, and in fact this implement, on closer inspection, resembles a pen or a quill or a well-sharpened pencil or a ballpoint, and if its size seems excessive that must signify the importance this writing implement has in the existence of the above-mentioned sedentary person. As far as I know, the black line that comes from the tip of that cheap scepter is precisely the path that has led me here, and it is therefore not impossible that the King of Clubs is the appellative due me, and in that case the term Clubs must be understood also in the sense of those vertical lines children learn in penmanship class, the first stammering of those who try to communicate by drawing signs, or in the sense of the poplar wood from which the white cellulose is pulped and quires of sheets are unrolled, ready to be (and again meanings interlock) penned.

The Two of Coins for me too is a sign of exchange, of that exchange that is in every sign, from the first scrawl made in such a way as to be distinguished from the other scrawls of the first writer, the sign of writing wed to exchanges of other things, invented not accidentally by the Phoenicians, involved in the currents of currency as in the circulation of gold coins, the letter that must not be taken literally, the letter that transfers values that without a letter are valueless, the letter always ready to grow upon itself and deck itself with blossoms of the sublime, you see it here illuminated and beflowered on its meaningful surface, the letter as prime element of Belles-Lettres, though always enfolding in its significant coils the currency of significance, the letter Ess that twists to signify it is ready and waiting to signify significations, the signifying sign that has the form of an Ess, so that its significations can also assume the form of Ess.

And all those cups are nothing but dried-up inkwells waiting for the demons to rise to the surface from the darkness of the ink, the infernal powers, the bogeymen, the hymns to the night, the flowers of evil, the hearts of darkness, or else for the melancholy angel to glide by that distills the humors of the soul and decants states of grace and epiphanies. But no. The Page of Cups depicts me as I bend to peer into the envelope of myself; and I do not look content: it is futile to shake and squeeze, the soul is a dry inkwell. What Devil would accept it in payment to guarantee me the success of my work?

The Devil should be the card that, in my profession, is most often encountered: is not the raw material of writing all a rising to the surface of hairy claws, cur-like scratching, goat’s goring, repressed violences that grope in the darkness? But the thing can be seen in two ways: this demoniacal teeming inside single and plural persons, in deeds done or thought to have been done, in words said or thought to have been said, can be a way of doing and saying that is wrong, and it is best to press everything down below; or else it may instead be what counts most and since it exists it is advisable to allow it to come out; two ways of seeing the thing which then, in turn, are variously mingled, because it could be, for example, that the negative is negative but necessary because without it the positive is not positive, or else the negative may not be negative at all, and the only negative, if anything, is what we believe positive.

In this case the man who writes can only try to follow an unattainable model: the Marquis so diabolical as to be called divine, who impelled the word to explore the black frontiers of the thinkable. (And the story we should try to read in these tarots will be that of the two sisters who could be the Queen of Cups and the Queen of Swords, one angelic and the other perverse. In the convent where the former has taken the veil, as soon as she turns around a Hermit flings her down and takes advantage of her charms from behind; when she complains, the Abbess, or Popess, says: “You do not know the world, Justine: the power of money (coins) and of the sword chiefly enjoys making objects of other human beings; the varieties of pleasure have no limits, like the combinations of conditioned reflexes; it is all a matter of deciding who is to condition the reflexes. Your sister Juliette can initiate you into the promiscuous secrets of Love; from her you can learn that there are those who enjoy turning the Wheel of tortures and those who enjoy being Hanged by their feet.”)

All this is like a dream which the word bears within itself and which, passing through him who writes, is freed and frees him. In writing, what speaks is what is repressed. And then the white-bearded Pope could be the great shepherd of souls and interpreter of dreams Sigismund of Vindobona, and for confirmation, the only thing is to see if somewhere in the rectangle of tarots it is possible to read that story which, according to the teachings of his doctrine, is hidden in the warp of all stories. You take a young man, Page of Coins, who wants to drive from himself a dark prophecy: patricide and marriage to his own mother. You send him off at random on a richly adorned Chariot. The Two of Clubs marks a crossroads on the dusty highway, or, rather, it is the crossroads, and he who has been there can recognize the place where the road that comes from Corinth crosses the one that leads to Thebes. The Ace of Clubs reports a street—or, rather, road—brawl, when two chariots refuse to give way and remain with the axles of their wheels locked, and the drivers leap to the ground enraged and dusty, shouting exactly like truckdrivers, insulting each other, calling each other’s father and mother pig and cow, and if one draws a knife from his pocket, the consequences are likely to be fatal. In fact, here there is the Ace of Swords, there is The Fool, there is Death: it is the stranger, the one coming from Thebes, who is left on the ground; that will teach him to control his nerves; you, Oedipus, did not do it on purpose, we know that; it was temporary insanity; but meanwhile you had flung yourself on him, armed, as if all your life you had been waiting for nothing else. Among the next cards there is The Wheel of Fortune, or Sphinx, there is the entrance into Thebes like a triumphant Emperor, there are the cups of the feast of the wedding with Queen Jocasta, whom we see here portrayed as the Queen of Coins, in widow’s weeds, a desirable if mature woman. But the prophecy is fulfilled: the plague infests Thebes, a cloud of germs falls on the city, floods the streets and the houses with miasmas, bodies erupt in red and blue buboes and drop like flies in the streets, lapping the water of the muddy puddles with parched lips. In these cases the only thing to do is consult the Delphic Sibyl, asking her to explain what laws or taboos have been violated: the old woman with the tiara and the open book, tagged with the strange epithet of Popess, is she. If you like, in the Arcanum called Judgment or The Angel you can recognize the primal scene to which the Sigismundian doctrine of dreams harks back: the tender little angel who wakes at night and among the clouds of sleep sees the grownups doing something, he does not know what, all naked and in incomprehensible positions, Mummy and Daddy and other guests. In the dream fate speaks. We can only make note of it. Oedipus, who knew nothing about it, tears out the light of his eyes: literally, the Hermit tarot shows him as he takes a light from his eyes, and sets off on the road to Colonus with the pilgrim’s cloak and staff.

Of all this, writing warns like the oracle and purifies like the tragedy. So it is nothing to make a problem of. Writing, in short, has a subsoil which belongs to the species, or at least to civilization, or at least to certain income brackets. And I? And that amount, large or small, of myself, exquisitely personal, that I believed I was putting into it? If I can call up an author’s shade to accompany my distrustful steps in the territories of individual destiny, of the ego, of (as they now say) “real life,” it should be that of the Egotist of Grenoble, the provincial out to conquer the world, whom I once read as if I were expecting from him the story I was to write (or live: there was a confusion between the two verbs, in him, or in the me of that time). Which of these cards would he point out to me, if he were still to answer my call? The cards of the novel I have not written, with Love and all the energy it sets in motion and the fears and the deceits, the triumphal Chariot of ambition, the World that comes toward you, the happiness promised by beauty? But here I see only the blocks of scenes that are repeated, the same, the routine of the daily grind, beauty as the picture magazines photograph it. Was this the prescription I was expecting from him? (For the novel and for something obscurely related to the novel: “life”?) What is it that kept all this together and has gone away?

Discarding first one tarot, then another, I find myself with few cards in my hand. The Knight of Swords, the Hermit, the Juggler are still me as I have imagined myself from time to time, while I remain seated, driving the pen up and down the page. Along paths of ink the warrior impetuosity of youth gallops away, the existential anxiety, the energy of the adventure spent in a slaughter of erasures and crumpled paper. And in the card that follows I find myself in the dress of an old monk, isolated for years in his cell, a bookworm searching by the lantern’s light for a knowledge forgotten among footnotes and index references. Perhaps the moment has come to admit that only tarot number one honestly depicts what I have succeeded in being: a juggler, or conjurer, who arranges on a stand at a fair a certain number of objects and, shifting them, connecting them, interchanging them, achieves a certain number of effects.

The trick of arranging some tarots in a line and making stories emerge from them is something I could perform also with paintings in museums: putting, for example, a Saint Jerome in the place of the Hermit, a Saint George in the place of the Knight of Swords, to see what comes out. They are, as it happens, the painting subjects that have most attracted me. In museums I always enjoy stopping at the Saint Jeromes. The painters portray the hermit as a scholar consulting treatises outdoors, seated at the mouth of a cave. A little farther on a lion is curled up, domestic, serene. Why the lion? Does the written word tame passions? Or subdue the forces of nature? Or does it find a harmony with the inhumanity of the universe? Or incubate a violence, held back but always ready to spring, to claw? Explain it as you will, painters have been pleased to show Saint Jerome with a lion (taking as genuine the old tale of the thorn in the paw, thanks to the usual mistake of a copyist), and so it gives me satisfaction and security to see them together, to try to recognize myself there, not particularly in the saint or even in the lion (though, for that matter, the two often resemble each other), but in the pair together, in the whole, in the picture, figures, objects, landscape.

In the landscape the objects of reading and writing are placed among rocks, grass, lizards, having become products and instruments of the mineral-vegetable-animal continuum. Among the hermit’s bric-a-brac there is also a skull: the written word always takes into consideration the erasure of the person who has written or the one who will read. Inarticulate nature comprehends in her discourse the discourse of human beings.

But remember we are not in the desert, in the jungle, on Crusoe’s island: the city is only a step away. The paintings of hermits, almost always, have a city in the background. An engraving by Dürer is completely occupied by the city, a low pyramid carved with squared towers and peaked roofs; the saint, flattened against a hillock in the foreground, has his back to the city and does not take his eyes off his book, beneath his monk’s hood. In Rembrandt’s drypoint the high city dominates the lion, who turns his muzzle around, and the saint below, reading blissfully in the shadow of a walnut tree, under a broad-brimmed hat. At evening the hermits see the lights come on at the windows; the wind bears, in gusts, the music of festivities. In a quarter of an hour, if they chose, they could be back among other people. The hermit’s strength is measured not by how far away he has gone to live, but by the scant distance he requires to detach himself from the city, without ever losing sight of it.

Or else the solitary writer is shown in his study, where a Saint Jerome, were it not for the lion, could easily be mistaken for a Saint Augustine: the job of writing makes individual lives uniform, one man at a desk resembles every other man at a desk. But in addition to the lion, other animals visit the scholar’s solitude, discreet messengers from the outside world: a peacock (Antonello da Messina, London), a wolf cub (another engraving of Dürer’s), a Maltese spaniel (Carpaccio, Venice).

In these paintings of interiors, what counts is how a certain number of quite distinct objects are set in a certain space and allow light and time to flow over their surface: bound volumes, parchment scrolls, hourglasses, astrolabes, shells, the sphere hanging from the ceiling which shows how the heavens rotate (in Dürer, its place is taken by a pumpkin). The Saint Jerome-Saint Augustine figure can be seated squarely in the center of the canvas, as in Antonello, but we know that the portrait includes the catalogue of objects, and the space of the room reproduces the space of the mind, the encyclopaedic ideal of the intellect, its order, its categories, its calm.

Or its restlessness: Saint Augustine, in Botticelli (Uffizi), begins to grow nervous, crumples page after page and throws them on the ground beneath the desk. Also in the study where there reigns meditative serenity, concentration, ease (I am still looking at the Carpaccio), a high-tension current passes: the scattered books left open turn their pages on their own, the hanging sphere sways, the light falls obliquely through the window, the dog raises his nose. Within the interior space there hovers the announcement of an earthquake: the harmonious intellectual geometry grazes the borderline of paranoid obsession. Or is it the explosions outside that shake the windows? As only the city gives a meaning to the bleak landscape of the hermit, so the study, with its silence and its order, is simply the place where the oscillations of the seismographs are recorded.

For years now I have been shut up in here, brooding over a thousand reasons for not putting my nose outside, unable to find one that gives my spirit peace. Do I perhaps regret more extroverted ways of expressing myself? There was also a time when, wandering through museums, I would stop to face and question the Saint Georges and their dragons. The paintings of Saint George have this virtue: you can tell the painter was pleased to have to paint a Saint George. Because Saint George can be painted without believing too much in him, believing only in painting and not in the theme? But Saint George’s position is shaky (as a legendary saint, too similar to the Perseus of the myth; as a mythical hero, too similar to the younger brother of the fairy tale), and painters always seem to have been aware of this, so they always looked on him with a somewhat “primitive” eye. But, at the same time, believing: in the way painters and writers have of believing in a story that has gone through many forms, and with painting and repainting, writing and rewriting, if it was not true, has become so.

Even in the painters’ pictures, Saint George always has an impersonal face, not unlike the Knight of Swords of the cards, and his battle with the dragon is a scene on a coat of arms, fixed outside of time, whether you see him galloping with his lance at rest, as in Carpaccio, charging from his half of the canvas at the dragon who rushes from the other half, and attacking with a concentrated expression, his head down, like a cyclist (around, in the details, there is a calendar of corpses whose stages of decomposition reconstruct the temporal development of the story), or whether horse and dragon are superimposed, monogram-like, as in the Louvre Raphael, where Saint George is using his lance from above, driving it down into the monster’s throat, operating with angelic surgery (here the rest of the story is condensed in a broken lance on the ground and a blandly amazed virgin); or in the sequence: princess, dragon, Saint George, the animal (a dinosaur!) is presented as the central element (Paolo Uccello, in London and Paris); or whether Saint George comes between the dragon in the rear and the princess in the foreground (Tintoretto, London).

In any case, Saint George performs his feat before our eyes, always closed in his breastplate, revealing nothing of himself: psychology is no use to the man of action. If anything, we could say psychology is all on the dragon’s side, with his angry writhings: the enemy, the monster, the defeated have a pathos that the victorious hero never dreams of possessing (or takes care not to show). It is a short step from this to saying that the dragon is psychology: indeed, he is the psyche, he is the dark background of himself that Saint George confronts, an enemy who has already massacred many youths and maidens, an internal enemy who becomes an object of loathsome alien-ness. Is it the story of an energy projected into the world, or is it the diary of an introversion?

Other paintings depict the next stage (the slaughtered dragon is a stain on the ground, a deflated container), and reconciliation with nature is celebrated, as trees and rocks grow to occupy the whole picture, relegating to a corner the little figures of the warrior and the monster (Altdorfer, Munich; Giorgione, London); or else it is the festivity of regenerated society around the hero and the princess (Pisanello, Verona; and Carpaccio, in the later pictures of the Schiavoni cycle). (Pathetic implicit meaning: the hero being a saint, there will not be a wedding but a baptism.) Saint George leads the dragon on a leash into the square to execute him in a public ceremony. But in all this festivity of the city freed from a nightmare, there is no one who smiles: every face is grave. Trumpets sound and drums roll, we have come to witness capital punishment, Saint George’s sword is suspended in the air, we are all holding our breath, on the point of understanding that the dragon is not only the enemy, the outsider, the other, but is us, a part of ourselves that we must judge.

Along the walls of San Giorgio degli Schiavoni, in Venice, the stories of Saint George and Saint Jerome follow one another, as if they were a single story. And perhaps they really are one story, the life of the same man: youth, maturity, old age, and death. I have only to find the thread that links the chivalrous enterprise with the conquest of wisdom. But just now, had I not managed to turn Saint Jerome toward the outside and Saint George toward the inside?

Let us stop and think. If you consider carefully, the element common to both stories is the relationship with a fierce animal, the dragon-enemy or the lion-friend. The dragon menaces the city; the lion, solitude. We can consider them a single animal: the fierce beast we encounter both outside and inside ourselves, in public and in private. There is a guilty way of inhabiting the city: accepting the conditions of the fierce beast, giving him our children to eat. There is a guilty way of inhabiting solitude: believing we are serene because the fierce beast has been made harmless by a thorn in his paw. The hero of the story is he who in the city aims the point of his lance at the dragon’s throat, and in solitude keeps the lion with him in all its strength, accepting it as guard and domestic genie, but without hiding from himself its animal nature.

So I have succeeded in coming to a conclusion, I can consider myself satisfied. But will I not have been too pontifical? I reread. Shall I tear it all up? Let us see. The first thing to be said is that the Saint George-Saint Jerome story is not one with a before and an after: we are in the center of a room with figures who present themselves to our view all together. The character in question either succeeds in being warrior and sage in everything he does and thinks, or he will be no one, and the same beast is at once dragon-enemy in the daily massacre of the city and lion-guard in the space of thoughts: and he does not allow himself to be confronted except in the two forms together.

Thus I have set everything to rights. On the page, at least. Inside me, all remains as before.





Three Tales of Madness and Destruction




Now that we have seen these greasy pieces of cardboard become a museum of old masters, a theater of tragedy, a library of poems and novels, the silent brooding over down-to-earth words bound to come up along the way, following the arcane pictures, can attempt to soar higher, to peal forth winged words, perhaps heard in some theater balcony, where their resonance transforms moth-eaten sets on a creaking stage into palaces and battlefields.

In fact, the three who now started quarreling did so with solemn gestures as if declaiming, and while all three pointed to the same card, with their free hand and with evocative grimaces they exerted themselves to convey that those figures were to be interpreted this way and not that. Now in the card whose name varies according to custom and language—The Tower, The House of God, The House of the Devil—a young man carrying a sword, you would say for the purpose of scratching his flowing blond hair (now white), recognizes the platform before Elsinore castle when the night’s blackness is rent by an apparition which freezes the sentinels in fear: the majestic march of a ghost whose grizzled beard and shining helmet and breastplate cause him to resemble both the tarots’ Emperor and the late king of Denmark, who has returned to demand Justice. In such questionable shape, the cards lend themselves to the young man’s silent interrogation: “Why the sepulchre hath op’d his ponderous and marble jaws that thou, dead corse, again, in complete steel, revisit’st thus the glimpses of The Moon?”

He is interrupted by a lady who, with distraught eye, insists she recognizes in that same Tower the castle of Dunsinane when the vengeance darkly prophesied by the witches will be unleashed: Birnam Wood will move, climbing the slopes of the hill, hosts and hosts of trees will advance, their roots torn from the earth, their boughs outstretched as in the Ten of Clubs, attacking the fortress, and the usurper will learn that Macduff, born through a sword’s slash, is the one who, with a slash of the Sword, will cut off his head. And thus the sinister juxtaposition of cards finds a meaning: Popess, or prophesying sorceress; Moon, or night in which thrice the brinded cat hath mew’d, and the hedgepig whin’d, and newt, frog, and adders allow themselves to be caught for the broth; Wheel, or stirring of the bubbling cauldron where witches’ mummy is dissolved with gall of goat, wool of bat, finger of birth-strangled babe, poisoned entrails, tails of shitting monkeys, just as the most senseless signs the witches mix in their brew sooner or later find a meaning that confirms them and reduces you, you and your logic, to a gruel.

But an old man’s trembling finger is now pointed at the Arcanum of the Tower and the Thunderbolt. In his other hand he holds up the figure of the King of Cups, surely to make us recognize him, since no royal attributes remain on his derelict person: nothing in the world has been left him by his unnatural daughters (this is what he seems to say, pointing to two portraits of cruel, crowned ladies and then at the squalid landscape of the Moon), and now others want to usurp even this card from him, the proof of how he was driven from his palace, emptied from the walls like a can of rubbish, abandoned to the fury of the elements. Now he inhabits the storm and the rain and the wind as if he could have no other home, as if the world were allowed to contain only hail and thunder and tempest, just as his mind now houses only wind and thunderbolts and madness. Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks! You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout till you have drench’d our steeples, drown’d the cocks! You sulphurous and thought-executing fires, vaunt-couriers to oak-cleaving thunderbolts, singe my white head! And thou, all-shaking thunder, smite flat the thick rotundity o’ the world! Crack nature’s molds, all chromosomes spill at once that make ungrateful man! We read this hurricane of thoughts in the eyes of the old sovereign seated in our midst, his bent shoulders huddled no longer in his ermine mantle but in a Hermit’s habit, as if he were still wandering by lantern light over the heath without shelter, the Fool his only support and mirror of his madness.

Instead, for the young man ahead of him the Fool is merely the role he has set himself to play, the better to work out a revenge plot and to conceal his spirit, distraught by the revelation of the guilty deeds of his mother, Gertrude, and his uncle. If this is neurosis, there is a method in it, and in every method, neurosis. (We know this well, glued to our game of tarots.) It was the story of relations between the young and the old that he, Hamlet, had come to tell us: the more fragile youth feels itself in the face of age’s authority, the more it is driven to form an extreme and absolute idea of itself, and the more it remains dominated by looming parental phantoms. The young arouse similar uneasiness in the old: they loom like ghosts, they wander around hanging their heads, digging up remorses the old had buried, scorning what the old believe their finest possession: experience. So let Hamlet play the fool, with his stockings ungartered and a book open under his nose: the ages of transition are subject to mental ailments. For that matter, his mother has surprised him (The Lover!) raving for Ophelia: the diagnosis is quickly made, we shall call it love-madness and thus all is explained. If anything, Ophelia, poor angel, will be the one who pays: the Arcanum that defines her is Temperance and already foretells her watery death.

Here is The Juggler to announce that a company of mountebanks or strolling players has arrived to perform at court: it is an opportunity to confront the guilty parties with their misdeeds. The play tells of an adulterous and murdering Empress: does Gertrude recognize herself? Claudius runs off, upset. From this moment on, Hamlet knows that his uncle spies on him from behind the curtains: a smart blow of the Sword against a moving arras would be enough to fell the king. How now! A rat? Dead, for a ducat, dead! But no: it was not the king hidden there but (as the card called The Hermit reveals) old Polonius, nailed forever in his eavesdropping pose, poor spy who could cast very little light. You do nothing right, Hamlet: you have not appeased your father’s shade and you have orphaned the maiden you loved. Your character meant you for abstract mental speculation: it is no accident that the Page of Coins portrays you absorbed in the contemplation of a circular drawing: perhaps the mandala, diagram of an ultraterrestrial harmony.

Even our less contemplative fellow guest, otherwise known as the Queen of Swords or Lady Macbeth, at the sight of The Hermit’s card seems distraught: perhaps she sees there another ghostly apparition, the hooded shade of the butchered Banquo, advancing with difficulty along the corridors of the castle, to sit down uninvited at the place of honor at the banquet, shaking his gory locks into the soup. Or else she recognizes her husband in person, Macbeth, who has murdered sleep: by the lantern’s glow in the night he visits the guests’ rooms, hesitating like a mosquito who dislikes staining the pillowcases. My hands are of your color, but I shame to wear a heart so white!, his wife taunts and drives him, but this does not mean she is so much worse than he: they have shared the roles like a devoted couple, marriage is the encounter of two egoisms that grind each other reciprocally and from which spread the cracks in the foundations of civilized society, the pillars of public welfare stand on the viper’s eggshells of private barbarity.

And yet we have seen that in The Hermit, with far more verisimilitude, King Lear has recognized himself, outcast and mad, roaming in search of the angelic Cordelia (there, Temperance is another lost card, and it is all his fault, this time), the daughter he failed to understand and unjustly drove out while lending credence to the lying treachery of Regan and Goneril. With daughters, whatever a father does is wrong: authoritarian or permissive, parents can never expect to be thanked. The generations stare at each other grimly, they speak only to misunderstand each other, to trade blame for growing up unhappy and dying disappointed.

Where has Cordelia got to? Perhaps without any other refuge or clothes to cover herself, she has fled to these deserted heaths, drinking water from the ditches, and as to Saint Mary the Egyptian, the birds bring her grains of millet for her nourishment. This then could be the meaning of the Arcanum The Star, in which Lady Macbeth, on the contrary, recognizes herself, sleepwalking, getting up naked at night with her eyes closed but gazing at spots of blood on her hands, as she toils to wash them, in vain. It takes more than that! Here’s the smell of blood still. All the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand.

Hamlet opposes this interpretation. In his tale he has reached the point (the Arcanum The World) where Ophelia loses her mind, burbles nonsense and jingles, wanders through the fields girt with garlands—crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples that liberal shepherds give a grosser name, but our cold maids do call dear departed’s member—and to continue his story he needs that very card, Arcanum Seventeen, in which Ophelia is seen on the bank of a stream, bent toward the glassy and sticky current that in an instant will drown her, staining her hair a moldy green.

Hidden among the graves of the cemetery, Hamlet thinks about Death, holding up the jawless skull of Yorick the jester. (This, then, is the roundish object the Page of Coins has in his hand!) Where the professional Fool is dead, the destructive folly that was reflected in him and found its release through ritual formulas becomes mingled with the language and actions of princes and subjects, unprotected even against themselves. Hamlet already knows that wherever he turns, he collects miscreants; do they believe him incapable of killing? Why, that is the only thing he succeeds in doing! The trouble is that he always strikes mistaken targets: when you kill, you always kill the wrong man.

Two Swords are crossed in a duel: they seem identical, but one is sharp, the other dull, one is poisoned, the other aseptic. However things go, the young are always the first to cut out one another’s guts; Laertes and Hamlet, whom a kinder fate would have seen brothers-in-law, are now reciprocal murderer and victim. In the Cup King Claudius has thrown a pearl which is a poison-tablet for his nephew: “Gertrude, do not drink!” But the Queen is thirsty. It is too late! Too late, Hamlet’s sword runs the king through, the fifth act is already ending.

For all three tragedies the advance of a victorious king’s Chariot of war marks the fall of the curtain. Fortinbras of Norway lands on the pale Baltic island, the palace is silent, the warrior enters among the marble walls: why, it is a morgue! There lying dead is the entire royal family of Denmark! O proud, snobbish Death! What feast is toward in thine eternal cell that thou so many princes at a shot so bloodily hast struck, leafing through the Almanach de Gotha with thy scythe-paper-knife?

No, it is not Fortinbras: it is the King of France, Cordelia’s husband, who has crossed the channel to support Lear and is closely besieging the army of Gloucester’s Bastard, contended by the two rival and perverse queens, but he will not be in time to free the mad king and his daughter from their cage, shut up there to sing like birds and laugh at gilded butterflies. For the first time there is a bit of peace in the family: if the murderer would delay only a few minutes. But instead he is punctual, hangs Cordelia, and is killed by Lear, who cries: Why should a dog, a horse, a rat have life and thou no breath at all? And Kent, faithful Kent, can only wish for him: Break, heart, I prithee, break!

Unless it is neither the King of Norway nor the King of France, but the legitimate heir of the throne of Scotland usurped by Macbeth. His chariot advances at the head of the English army, and finally Macbeth is forced to say: I ‘gin to be aweary of The Sun, and wish the syntax o’ The World were now undone, that the playing cards were shuffled, the folios’ pages, the mirror-shards of the disaster.





Note





Note




This book is made first of pictures—the tarot playing cards—and secondly of written words. Through the sequence of the pictures stories are told, which the written word tries to reconstruct and interpret.

The tarots are ancient cards for games and for fortune-telling, popular especially in France and in Italy. The deck consists of seventy-eight cards. Besides the ten numeral cards and the four court cards (King, Queen, Knight, Page) for each of the four suits (Cups, Coins, Clubs, Swords), there are twenty-one tarots proper (also called the Major Arcana), plus The Fool.

Tarots have inspired a vast tradition of cartomancy, based on various interpretations: symbolic, astrological, cabalistic, alchemistic. There are few traces of all this in the present book, where the cards are “read” in the most simple and direct fashion: by observing what the picture portrays and establishing a meaning, which varies according to the sequence of cards into which each individual card is inserted.

The book is made up of two texts, The Castle of Crossed Destinies and The Tavern of Crossed Destinies. The former was published for the first time in Tarots: The Visconti Pack in Bergamo and New York by the publisher Franco Maria Ricci of Parma in 1969 (the same publisher has now, in 1976, brought out an English-language edition). This volume reproduces in color and in the original dimensions the tarots painted by Bonifacio Bembo for the Dukes of Milan around the middle of the fifteenth century. The surviving originals of these miniatures are now divided between the Accademia Carrara in Bergamo and the Morgan Library in New York. This volume reproduces eight of them.

The small black-and-white illustrations throughout the text are based on the highly refined miniatures of Bembo, but they obviously do not mean to take their place. Some cards of the Bembo deck have been lost, including two that are very important for my stories: The Devil and The Tower. At the places where these cards are mentioned in my text, I was unable to place the corresponding illustrations in the margin.

In The Castle, the tarots that make up each story are arranged in a double file, horizontal or vertical, and are crossed by three further double files of tarots (horizontal or vertical) which make up other stories. The result is a general pattern (see page 40) in which you can “read” three stories horizontally and three stories vertically, and in addition, each of these sequences of cards can also be “read” in reverse, as another tale. Thus we have a total of twelve stories.

The central axes of this pattern present episodes inspired by the Orlando Furioso of Lodovico (“The Tale of Roland Crazed with Love” and “The Tale of Astolpho on the Moon”). The poem Orlando Furioso was written during the first half of the sixteenth century, almost half a century after Bembo’s miniatures, but it was born from that same civilization of the Italian courts of the Renaissance.

The second part of the book, The Tavern, is similarly composed, with reference to the widely diffused, popular printed tarots, still sold in France today. These are the Ancien Tarot de Marseille of the firm of Grimaud, reproducing a deck printed in the eighteenth century (but based certainly on drawings from the previous century). Unlike the painted tarots, these cards lend themselves to reduced printed reproduction, losing none of their connotations, only their colors.

The Marseilles tarots are used in France especially for cartomancy, and they have had a considerable literary renown, particularly since the surrealist period. Very similar to the Marseilles deck are the tarots used in Italy as popular playing cards, in both the North and the South.

There are some variants between the French and the Italian names of the cards. La Maison-Dieu is the mysterious French name for the card called in Italian La Torre (The Tower). Le Jugement is known as L’Angelo (The Angel). L’Amoureux may be called L’Amore (Love) or Gli Amanti (The Lovers). From the singular L’Etoile the name shifts to the plural Le Stelle. I have followed whichever nomenclature best suited the situation. The first tarot has an obscure name in both languages: Le Bateleur, II Bagatto. As a rule it is interpreted as The Juggler or The Magician.

In The Tavern too the sequence of the tarots composes stories, and the seventy-eight cards spread out on the table form a general pattern (see page 98) in which the various tales intersect. But whereas in The Castle the cards making up the individual tales are in clearly defined horizontal or vertical rows, in The Tavern they form blocks with more irregular outlines, superimposed in the central area of the general pattern, where cards that appear in almost all the tales are concentrated.

I publish this book to be free of it: it has obsessed me for years. I began by trying to line up tarots at random, to see if I could read a story in them. “The Waverer’s Tale” emerged; I started writing it down; I looked for other combinations of the same cards; I realized the tarots were a machine for constructing stories; I thought of a book, and I imagined its frame: the mute narrators, the forest, the inn; I was tempted by the diabolical idea of conjuring up all the stories that could be contained in a tarot deck.

I thought of constructing a kind of crossword puzzle made of tarots instead of letters, of pictographic stories instead of words. I wanted each of the stories to have a coherent significance, and I wanted them to afford me pleasure in writing them—or in rewriting them, if they were already classic stories. I succeeded with the Visconti tarots because I first constructed the stories of Roland and Astolpho, and for the other stories I was content to put them together as they came, with the cards laid down. I could have followed the same method with the Marseilles tarots, but I was unwilling to sacrifice any of the narrative possibilities I was offered by these cards, so crude and mysterious. The Marseilles tarots continued giving me ideas, and every tale tended to attract all the cards to itself. I had already written “The Waverer,” which required many cards; I had in mind a Shakespearean pastiche with Hamlet, Macbeth, King Lear; I didn’t want to lose Faust, Parsifal, Oedipus, and the many other famous stories that I saw appear and disappear among the tarots, and also stories that had come to me somewhat accidentally: but all culminated in the same cards, the most dramatic and significant ones.

And so I spent whole days taking apart and putting back together my puzzle; I invented new rules for the game, I drew hundreds of patterns, in a square, a rhomboid, a star design; but some essential cards were always left out, and some superfluous ones were always there in the midst. The patterns became so complicated (they took on a third dimension, becoming cubes, polyhedrons) that I myself was lost in them.

To escape from this impasse I gave up patterns and resumed writing the tales that had already taken shape, not concerning myself with whether or not they would find a place in the network of the others. But I felt that the game had a meaning only if governed by ironclad rules; an established framework of construction was required, conditioning the insertion of one story in the others. Without it, the whole thing was gratuitous.

There was another fact: not all the stories I succeeded in composing visually produced good results when I set myself to writing them down. There were some that sparked no impulse in the writing, and I had to eliminate them because they would have lowered the tension of the style. Then there were others that passed the test and immediately acquired the cohesive strength of the written word which, once written, will not be budged.

Suddenly, I decided to give up, to drop the whole thing; I turned to something else. It was absurd to waste any more time on an operation whose implicit possibilities I had by now explored completely, an operation that made sense only as a theoretical hypothesis. A month went by, perhaps a whole year, and I thought no more about it. Then all of a sudden, it occurred to me that I could try again in a different way, more simple and rapid, with guaranteed success. I began making patterns again, correcting them, complicating them. Again I was trapped in this quicksand, locked in this maniacal obsession. Some nights I woke up and ran to note a decisive correction, which then led to an endless chain of shifts. On other nights I would go to bed relieved at having found the perfect formula; and the next morning, on waking, I would tear it up. Even now, with the book in galleys, I continue to work over it, take it apart, rewrite. I hope that when the volume is printed I will be outside it once and for all. But will this actually happen?

I would like to add that for a certain time it was my intention to write also a third part for this book. At first I wanted to find a third tarot deck fairly different from the other two. But then, instead of going on raving over the same medieval-Renaissance symbols, I thought of creating a sharp contrast, repeating an analogous operation with modern visual material. But what is the tarots’ contemporary equivalent as the portrayal of the collective unconscious mind? I thought of comic strips, of the most dramatic, adventurous, frightening ones: gangsters, terrified women, spacecraft, vamps, war in the air, mad scientists. I thought of complementing The Tavern and The Castle with a similar frame, The Motel of Crossed Destinies. Some people who have survived a mysterious catastrophe find refuge in a half-destroyed motel, where only a scorched newspaper page is left, the comics page. The survivors, who have become dumb in their fright, tell their stories by pointing to the drawings, but without following the order of each strip, moving from one strip to another in vertical or diagonal rows.

I went no further than the formulation of the idea as I have just described it. My theoretical and expressive interests had moved off in other directions. I always feel the need to alternate one type of writing with another, completely different, to begin writing again as if I had never written anything before.

T


1


BENEATH the red ramparts of Paris the army of France lay marshaled. Charlemagne was due to review his paladins. They had already been waiting for more than three hours. It was hot, an early summer afternoon, misty, a bit cloudy. Inside their armor, the men were steaming. Perhaps one or two in that motionless row of knights went off in a daze or a doze, but the armor kept them stiff in their saddles. Suddenly there were three trumpet calls. Plumes on charges swayed in the still air as if at a gust of wind, and silence replaced a surflike sound which must have come from the warriors snoring inside the metal throats of their helmets. Finally, from the end of the line, came Charlemagne, on a horse that looked larger than life, beard resting on his chest, and hands on the pommel of his saddle. With all his warring and ruling, ruling and waning, he seemed slightly aged since the last time those warriors had seen him.

At every officer he stopped his horse and turned to look him up and down. “And who are you, paladin of France?”

“Solomon of Brittany, sire!” boomed the knight, raising his visor and showing a flushed face. Then he added a few practical details, such as, “Five thousand mounted knights, three thousand five hundred foot soldiers, a thousand eight hundred service troops, five years’ campaigning.”

“Up with the Bretons, paladin!” said Charlemagne, and toc-toc, toc-toc, he trotted on to another squadron commander.

“Andwhoareyou, paladin of France?” he asked again.

“Oliver of Vienna, sire!” moved the lips as soon as the grill was up. Then, “Three thousand chosen knights, seven thousand troops, twenty siege machines. Conqueror of Proudarm the pagan, by the grace of God and for the glory of Charles King of the Franks.”

“Well done, my fine Viennese,” said Charlemagne. Then to the officers of his suite, “Rather thin, those horses, they need more fodder.” And on he went. “Andwhoareyou, paladin of France?” he repeated, always in the same rhythm: “Tatatata-tatata-tata ...”

“Bernard of Mompolier, sire! Winner of Brunamonte and Galifemo.”

“Beautiful city, Mompolier! City of beautiful women!” And to his suite, “See he’s put up in rank.” All these remarks, said by the king, gave pleasure, but they had been the same for years.

“Andwhoareyou, with that coat of arms I know?”

He knew all armorial bearings on their shields without needing to be told, but it was usage for names to be proffered and faces shown. Otherwise, someone with better things to do than be reviewed might send his armor on parade with another inside.

“Alard of Dordogne, son of Duke Amone ...”

“Good man, Alard, how’s your dad?” And on he went. “Tatatata-tatata-tata ...”

“Godfrey of Mountjoy! Knights, eight thousand, not counting dead!”

Crests waved. “Hugh the Dane!” “Namo of Bavaria!” “Palmerin of England!”

Evening was coming on. In the wind and dusk faces could not be made out clearly. But by now every word, every gesture was foreseeable, as all else in that war which had lasted so many years, its every skirmish and duel conducted according to rules so that it was always known beforehand who would win or lose, be heroic or cowardly, be gutted or merely unhorsed and thumped. Each night by torchlight the blacksmiths hammered out the same dents on cuirasses.

“And you?” The king had reached a knight entirely in white armor; only a thin black line ran round the seams. The rest was light and gleaming, without a scratch, well finished at every joint, with a helmet surmounted by a plume of some oriental cock, changing with every color in the rainbow. On the shield a coat of arms was painted between two draped sides of a wide cloak, within which opened another cloak on a smaller shield, containing yet another even smaller coat of arms. In faint but clear outline were drawn a series of cloaks opening inside each other› with something in the center that could not be made out, so minutely was it drawn. “Well, you there, looking so clean...” said Charlemagne, who the longer war lasted had less respect for cleanliness among his paladins.

“I,” came a metallic voice from inside the closed helmet, with a slight echo as if it were not a throat but the very armor itself vibrating, “am Agilulf Emo Bertrandin of the Guildivern and of the Others of Corbentraz and Sura, Knight of Selimpia Citeriore and Fez!”

“Aha ...!” exclaimed Charlemagne, and from his lower lip, pushed forward, came a faint whistle, as if to say, “You don’t expect me to remember all those names, do you?” Then he frowned at once. “And why don’t you raise your visor and show your face?”

The knight made no gesture. His right hand, gloved in close-webbed chain mail, gripped the crupper more firmly, while a quiver seemed to shake the other arm holding the shield.

“I’m talking to you, paladin!” insisted Charlemagne. “Why don’t you show your face to your king?”

A voice came clearly through die gorge piece. "Sire, because I do not exist!”

“This is too much!” exclaimed the emperor. “We’ve even got a knight who doesn’t exist! Let’s just have a look now.”

Agilulf seemed to hesitate a moment, then raised his visor with a slow but firm hand. The helmet was empty. No one was inside the white armor with its iridescent crest.

“Well, well! Who’d have thought it!” exclaimed Charlemagne. “And how do you do your job, then, if you don’t exist?”

“By will power,” said Agilulf, “and faith in our holy cause!”

“Oh yes, yes, well said, that is how one does one’s duty. Well, for someone who doesn’t exist, you seem in fine form!”

Agilulf was last in the rank. The emperor had now passed everyone in review. He turned his horse and moved away toward the royal tents. He was old and tended to put complicated questions from his mind.

A bugle sounded “Fall out.” Amid the usual confusion of horses, the forest of lances rippled into waves like a com field moved by the passing wind. The knights dismounted, moved their legs, stretched, while squires led off their horses by bridles. Then the paladins drew apart from the rabble and dust, gathering in clumps of colored crests, and easing themselves after all those hours of forced immobility, jesting, boasting, gossiping of women and honor.

Agilulf moved a few steps to mingle in one of these groups, then without any particular reason moved on to another, but did not press inside, and no one took notice of him. He stood uncertainly behind this or that knight without taking part in their talk, then moved aside. Night was felling. The iridescent plumes on his crest now seemed all merged into a single indeterminate color, but the white armor stood out, isolated on the field. Agilulf, as if feeling suddenly naked, made a gesture of crossing his arms and hugging his shoulders.

Then he shook himself and moved off with long strides toward the stabling area. Once there he found that the horses were not being groomed properly. He shouted at grooms, meted out punishments to stableboys, went his rounds of inspection, redistributed duties, explaining in detail to each man what he was to do and making him repeat the instructions to see if they were properly understood. And as more and more signs of negligence by his paladin brother officers showed up, he called them over one by one, dragging them from their sweet languid evening chatter, pointing out discreetly but firmly when they were at fault, making one go out on picket, one on sentry duty or one on patrol. He was always right, the paladins had to admit, but they did not hide their discontent. Agilulf Emo Bertrandin of the Guildivern and of the Others of Corbentraz and Sura, Knight of Selimpia Citeriore and Fez was certainly a model soldier, but disliked by all.





2


NIGHT, for armies in the field, is as well ordered as the starry sky: guard duty, sentry go, patrols. All the rest—the constant confusion of an army in war, the daily bustle in which the unexpected can suddenly start up like a restive horse—was now quiet, for sleep had conquered all the warriors and quadrupeds of the Christian array, the latter standing in rows, at times pawing a hoof or letting out a brief whinny or bray, the former finally loosed from helmets and cuirasses, snoring away, content at being distinct and differentiated human beings once again.

On the other side, in the Infidels’ camp, everything was the same: the same march of sentinels to and fro, the guard commander watching a last grain of sand pass through an hourglass before waking a new turn, the duty officer writing to his wife in the night watch. And both Christian and Infidel patrols went out half a mile, nearly reached the wood, then turned, each in opposite directions, without ever meeting, returning to camp to report all calm and going to bed. Over both enemy camps stars and moon flowed silently on. Nowhere is sleep so deep as in the army.

Only Agilulf found no relief. In his white armor, still clamped up, he tried to stretch out in his tent, one of the most ordered and comfortable in the Christian camp. He continued to think, not the lazy meandering thoughts of one about to fall asleep, but exact and definite thoughts. He raised himself on an elbow, and felt the need to apply himself to some manual job, like shining his sword, which was already resplendent^ or smearing the joints of his armor with grease. This impulse did not last long. Soon he was on his feet, moving out of the tent, taking up his lance and shield, and his whitish shadow moved over the camp. From cone-shaped tents rose a concert of heavy breathing. What it was like to shut one's eyes, lose consciousness, plunge into emptiness for a few hours and then wake up and find oneself the same as before, linked with the threads of one’s life again, Agilulf could not know, and his envy for the faculty of sleep possessed by people who existed, was vague, like something he could not even conceive of. What bothered him more was the sight of bare feet sticking up here and there from under tents, with toes upturned. The camp in sleep was a realm of bodies, a stretch of Adam’s old flesh, reeking from the wine and the sweat of the warriors' day, while on the threshold of pavilions lay messy heaps of empty armor which squires and retainers would shine and order in the moming. Agilulf passed by, attentive, nervous and proud; people's bodies gave him a disagreeable feeling resembling envy, but also a stab of pride, of contemptuous superiority. Here were his famous colleagues, the glorious paladins, but what were they? Here was their armor, proof of rank and name, of feats of power and worth, all reduced to a shell, to empty iron, and there lay the men themselves, snoring away, faces thrust into pillows with a thread of spittle dribbling from open lips. But he could not be taken into pieces or dismembered; he was, and remained, every moment of the day and night, Agilulf Bertrandin of the Guildivern and of the Others of Corbentraz and Sura, armed Knight of Selimpia Citeriore and Fez, on such-and-such a day, having carried out such-and-such actions to the glory of the Christian arms, and assumed in the Emperor Charlemagne’s army the command of such-and-such troops. He possessed the finest, whitest armor, inseparable from him, in the whole camp. He was a better officer than many who vaunted themselves illustrious, the best of all officers, in fact Yet there he was, walking unhappily in the night.

He heard a voice. “Sir officer, excuse me, but when does the guard change? They’ve left me here for three hours already!” It was a sentry, leaning on a lance as if he had a stomach ache.

Agilulf did not even turn. He said, “You’re mistaken, I’m not the guard officer,” and passed on.

“I’m sorry, sir officer. Seeing you walking around here I thought ...”

The slightest failure on duty gave Agilulf a mania to inspect everything and search out other errors and negligences, a sharp reaction to things ill done, out of place ... But having no authority to carry out such an inspection at that hour, even this attitude of his could seem improper, ill disciplined. Agilulf tried to control himself, to limit his interest to particular matters which would fall to him the next day, such as ordering arms’ racks for pikes, or arranging for hay to be kept dry. But his white shadow was continually getting entangled with the guard commander, the duty officer, a patrol wandering into a cellar looking for a demijohn of wine from the night before. Every time Agilulf had a moment’s uncertainty whether to behave like someone who could impose a respect for authority by his presence alone, or like one who is not where he is supposed to be, he would step back discreetly, pretending not to be there at all. In his uncertainty he stopped, thought, but did not succeed in taking up either attitude. He just felt himself a nuisance all round and longed for any contact with his neighbor, even if it meant shouting orders or curses, or grunting swear words like comrades in a tavern. But instead he mumbled a few incomprehensible words of greeting, and moved on. Still hoping they might say a word to him he would turn round slightly with a “Yes?,” then would realise at once that no one was talking to him, and would run off, like someone trying to escape.

He moved toward the edge of the camp, to a solitary place. The calm night was rufflled only by a soft flight of formless little shadows with silent wings, moving around with no direction—bats. Even their wretched bodies, half rat half bird, were something tangible and definite. They could flutter in the air, open-mouthed, swallowing mosquitoes, while Agilulf with all his armor was pierced through every chink by gusts of wind, flights of mosquitoes, and the rays of the moon. A vague anger that had been growing inside of him suddenly exploded. He drew his sword from his sheath, seized it in both hands and waved it wildly in the air against every low-flying bat. Nothing—they continued their flight without beginning or end, scarcely shaken by the movement of air. Agilulf swung blow after blow at them, now not even trying to hit the bats. His lunges followed more regular trajectories, and ordered themselves according to the rules of saber fencing. Now Agilulf was beginning to do his exercises, as if training for the next battle, testing the theory of parry, transverse, and feint.

Suddenly he stopped. A youth had appeared from behind a bush on the slope and was looking at him. He was only armed with a sword and had a light cuirass strapped to his chest.

“Oh, knight!” he exclaimed. “I didn’t want to interrupt you! Are you exercising for the battle? There’s to be a battle at dawn tomorrow, isn’t there? May I exercise with you?” And after a silence, “I reached camp yesterday ... It will be my first battle ... It’s all so different from what I expected ...”

Agilulf was standing sideways, sword close to his chest, arms crossed, all behind his shield. “Arrangements for armed encounters decided by headquarters are communicated to officers and troops one hour before the start of operations,” he said.

The youth looked a little dismayed, as if checked in his course, but overcoming a slight stutter, he went on with his former warmth. “Well, you see, I only just got here ... to avenge my father ... And I wish you experienced old soldiers would please tell me how I can get into battle right opposite that pagan dog Isohar and break my lance in his ribs, as he did to my heroic father, whom God will hold in glory forever, the late Marquis Gerard of Roussillon!”

“That’s quite simple, my lad,” said Agilulf, and there was a certain warmth in his voice, the warmth of one who knows rules and regulations by heart and enjoys showing his own competence, and confusing other’s ignorance. “You must put in a request to the Superintendency of Duels, Feuds and Besmirched Honor, specifying the motives for your request and it will then be considered how to best place you in a position to attain the satisfaction you desire.”

The youth, expecting at least a sign of surprised reverence at the sound of his father’s name, was mortified more by the tone than the sense of this speech. Then he tried to reflect on the words used by the knight, but so as not to admit their meaning, and also to keep up his enthusiasm, he said, “But sir knight, it’s not the superintendents who’re worrying me, please don’t think that. What I’m asking myself is whether in actual battle the courage I feel now, the excitement which seems enough to gut not one but a hundred Infidels, and my skill in arms too, as I'm well trained, you know, I mean if in all that confusion before getting my bearings ... Suppose I don’t find that dog, suppose he escapes me? I'd like to know just what you do in such a case, sir knight, can you tell me that? When a personal matter is at stake in battle, a matter concerning yourself and yourself alone ...”

Agilulf replied dryly, “I keep to the rules. Do that yourself and you won’t make a mistake.”

“Oh, I’m so sorry,” exclaimed the youth, looking crestfallen. “I didn’t want to be a nuisance. I really would have liked to try a little fencing exercise with you, with a paladin! I’m good at fencing, you know, but sometimes in the early morning my muscles feel slack and cold and don’t respond as I’d like. D’you find that too?”

“No, I do not,” said Agilulf, and turning his back, he walked away.

The youth wandered into the camp. It was the uncertain hour preceding dawn. Among the pavilions could be seen signs of early movement. Headquarters was already astir before the rising bugle. Torches were being lit in staff and orderly tents, contrasting with the half light filtering in from the sky. Was it really a day of battle, this one beginning, as the rumor went the night before? The new arrival was a prey to excitement, but a different excitement from what he had expected or felt till then. Rather, it was an anxiety to feel ground under his feet again, now that all he touched seemed to ring empty.

He met paladins already locked into their gleaming armor and plumed round helmets, their faces covered by visors. The youth turned round to look at them and longed to imitate their bearing, the proud way they swung on hips, breastplate, helmet and shoulder plates, as if made all in one piece! Here he was, among the invincible paladins. Here he was, ready to emulate them in battle, arms in hand, to become like them! But the two he was following, instead of mounting their horses, sat down behind a table covered with papers. They were obviously important commanders. The youth rushed forward to introduce himself. “I am Raimbaut of Roussillon, squire, son of the late Marquis Gerard! I've come to enroll so as to avenge my father who died an heroic death beneath the ramparts of Seville!”

The two raised their hands to their plumed helmets, lifted them by detaching headpiece and basinet, and put them on the table. From under the helmets appeared two bald yellowish heads, two faces with soft pouchy skin and straggly moustaches, the faces of clerks, of scribbling bureaucrats. “Roussillon, Roussillon,” they mumbled, turning over rolls with saliva-damped thumbs. “But we've already matriculated you yesterday! What d’you want? Why aren’t you with your unit?”

“Oh, I don’t know, last night I couldn’t sleep at the thought of battle. I must avenge my father you know, I must kill the Argalif Isohar and so find ... Oh yes: the Superintendency of Duels, Feuds and Besmirched Honor. Where is that?”

“He’s just arrived, this fellow, and he already knows everything! How d’you know of the Superintendency, may I ask?”

“I was told by that knight, I don’t know his name, the one all in white armor...”

“Oh, not him again! If he doesn’t stick his nose everywhere—that nose he hasn’t got!”

“What? Hasn’t got a nose?”

“Since he can’t get the itch,” said the other of the two from behind the table, “he finds nothing better to do than scratch the itches of others.”

“Why can’t he get the itch?”

“Where d’you think he could get the itch if he hasn’t got a place to itch? That’s a nonexistent knight, that is...”

“What do you mean, nonexistent? I saw him myself! There he was!”

“What did you see? Mere ironwork ... He exists without existing, understand, recruit?”

Never could young Raimbaut have imagined appearances to be so deceptive. From the moment he reached the camp he had found everything quite different from what it seemed.

“So in Charlemagne’s army one can be a knight with lots of names and titles and what’s more a bold warrior and zealous officer, without needing to exist!”

“Take it easy! No one said that in Charlemagne’s army one can etc., etc. All we said was in our regiment there is a knight who’s so and so. That’s all. What can or can't be as a matter of general practice is of no interest to us. D’you understand?”

Raimbaut moved off towards the pavilion of the Superintendency of Duels, Feuds and Besmirched Honor. Now he did not let casques and plumed helmets deceive him. He knew that the armor behind those tables merely hid dusty wrinkled little old men. He felt thankful there was someone inside.

“So you wish to avenge your father, the Marquis of Roussillon, by rank a general! Let’s see, now! The best procedure to avenge a general is to kill off three majors. We can assign you three easy ones, then you’re in the clear.”

“I don’t think I’ve explained things properly. It’s Isohar the Argalif I’ve got to kill. He was the one who felled my glorious father!”

“Yes yes, we realise that, but to fell an Argalif is not so simple, believe me ... What about four captains? We can guarantee you four Infidel captains in a morning. Four captains, you know, are equal to an army commander, and your father only commanded a brigade!”

“I’ll search out Isohar and gut him! Him and him alone!”

“You’ll end in the guardhouse, not in battle, you can be sure of that! Just think a little before speaking. If we make difficulties about Isohar, there are reasons. Suppose our emperor, for instance, is in the middle of negotiations with Isohar?”

But one of the officials whose head had been buried in papers till then now raised it jubilantly. “All solved! All solved! No need to do a thing! No point in a vendetta here! The other day Oliver thought two of his uncles were killed in battle and avenged them! But they’d stayed behind and got drunk under a table! We have these two extra uncles’ vendettas on our hands, a terrible mess. Now it can all be settled. We count an uncle’s vendetta as half a father’s. It’s as if we had a father’s vendetta clear, already carried out”

“Oh, dear father!” Raimbaut began to rave.

“What’s the matter?”

Reveille had sounded. The camp, in first light, swarmed with armed men. Raimbaut would have liked to mingle with that jostling mob gradually taking shape as squadrons and companies, but the moving armor sounded to him like a vibrating swarm of insects, buzzing like dry crackling husks. Many warriors were shut in their helmets and breastplates to the waist and under their hip and kidney guards appeared their legs, in breeks and stockings, because they were waiting to put on thigh pieces and leg pieces and knee pieces when they were in the saddle. Under those steel crests their legs seemed thin as crickets’. Their way of moving and speaking, their round eyeless heads, arms folded, hugging forearms and wrists, were also like those of crickets or ants. So the whole bustling throng seemed like a senseless clustering of insects. Amid them all, Raimbaut’s eyes searched for something: the white armor of Agilulf, whom he was hoping to meet again, maybe because his appearance could make the rest of the army seem more concrete, or because the most solid presence he had yet met was the nonexistent knight’s.

He found him under a pine tree, sitting on the ground, arranging fallen pine cones in a regular design: an isosceles triangle. At that hour of dawn Agilulf always needed to apply himself to some precise exercise: counting objects, arranging them in geometric patterns, resolving problems of arithmetic. It was the hour in which objects lose the consistency of shadow that accompanies them during the night and gradually reacquire colors, but seem to cross meanwhile an uncertain limbo, faintly touched, just breathed on by light; the hour in which one is least certain of the world’s existence. He, Agilulf, always needed to feel himself facing things as if they were a massive wall against which he could pit the tension of his will, for only in this way did he manage to keep a sure consciousness of himself. But if the world around was instead melting into the vague and ambiguous, he would feel himself drowning in that morbid half light, incapable of allowing any clear thought or decision to flower in that void. In such moments he felt sick, faint; sometimes only at the cost of extreme effort did he feel himself able to avoid melting away completely. It was then he began to count: trees, leaves, stones, lances, pine cones, anything in front of him. Or he put them in rows and arranged them in squares and pyramids. Applying himself to this exact occupation helped him to overcome his malaise, absorb his discontent and disquiet, reacquire his usual lucidity and composure.

This is how Raimbaut saw him, as with quick assured movements he arranged the pine cones in a triangle, then in squares on the sides of the triangle, and obstinately compared the pine cones on the shorter sides of the triangle with those of the square of the hypotenuse. Raimbaut realised that all this moved by ritual, convention, formulas, and beneath it there was ... what? He felt a vague sense of discomfort come over him at knowing himself to be outside all these rules of a game. But then his wanting to avenge his father’s death, his ardor to fight, to enroll himself among Charlemagne’s warriors—wasn’t that also a ritual to prevent plunging into the void, like this raising and setting of pine cones by Sir Agilulf? Oppressed by the turmoil of such unexpected questions, young Raimbaut flung himself on the ground and burst into tears.

He felt something on his head, a hand, an iron hand, but it felt very light. Agilulf was kneeling beside him. “What’s the matter, boy? Why are you crying?”

States of confusion or despair or fury in other human beings immediately gave perfect calm and security to Agilulf. His immunity from the shocks and agonies to which people who exist are subject made him take on a superior and protective attitude.

“I’m sorry,” exclaimed Raimbaut. “It’s weariness maybe. I haven’t managed to shut an eye all night, and now I’m bewildered. If I could only doze off a minute ... But now it’s day. And you, who have been awake too, how d’you do it?”

“I would feel bewildered if I dozed off for even a second,” said Agilulf slowly. “In fact I’d never come round at all but would be lost forever. So I keep wide awake every second of the day and night.”

“It must be awful...”

“No!” The voice was sharp and firm again.

“And don’t you ever take off your armor?”

The murmuring began again. “For me there’s no problem. Take off or put on has no meaning for me.”

Raimbaut had raised his head and was looking into the cracks of the visor, as if searching in that darkness for the glimmer of a glance.

“How come?”

“How otherwise?”

The iron gauntlet of white armor had settled on the young man’s hair again. Raimbaut hardly felt it weighing on his head. It was like an object that didn’t communicate human warmth, proximity, consolation or annoyance—and yet, he felt a kind of tense obstinacy spreading over him.





3


CHARLEMAGNE trotted along at the head of the Frankish army. It was the approach march. There was no hurry and they were not moving fast. Around the emperor were grouped his paladins, reining impetuous mounts at the bit. In the trotting and jostling their gleaming shields rose and fell like fishes’ gills. Behind them the army looked like a long gleaming fish—an eel.

Peasants, shepherds and villagers gathered at the comers of the road. “That’s the king; that is our Charles!” And they bowed to the ground at the sight, not so much of his unfamiliar crown, as of his beard. Then they straightened up at once to spot the warriors. “That’s Roland! No, that’s Oliver!” They never guessed right but it didn’t really matter since the paladins were all there, somewhere, so they could always swear to have seen the one they wanted.

Agilulf trotted with the group, every now and again spurting ahead, then halting and waiting for the others, twisting round to check that the troops were following in compact order, or turning toward the sun as if calculating the time from its height above the horizon. He was impatient. He alone among them all had clearly in mind the order of march, halting places, and the staging post to be reached before nightfall. As for the other paladins, well, an approach march was all right by them. They were approaching anyway; fast or slow, it didn’t matter to them. And with the excuse of the emperor’s age and weariness they were ready to stop for a drink at every tavern. The road seemed lined with tavern signs and tavern maids. Apart from that, they might have been traveling sealed up in a truck.

Charlemagne was still more curious than anyone else about the things he saw around him. “Oh, ducks, ducks!” he exclaimed. A flock of them was moving through the fields beside the road. In the middle of the flock was a man, but no one could make out what the devil he was doing. He was walking in a crouch, hands behind his back, plopping up and down on flat feet like web-toes, with his neck out, repeating, “Quà ... quà ... quà ...” The ducks were taking no notice of him, as if they considered him one of them. And to tell the truth there wasn’t much of a difference between the man and the ducks, because the rags he wore, of earthen color (they seemed mostly bits of sacking) had big greenish-grey areas the same color as feathers, and in addition, there were patches and rents and marks of various colors like the iridescent streakings of those birds.

“Hey you, that’s not the way to greet your emperor!” the paladins cried, always ready to make nuisances of themselves.

The man did not turn, but the ducks, annoyed by the voices, took alarm and all fluttered into flight together. The man waited a moment, watching them rise, beaks outstretched, then splayed out his arms and began skipping. Jumping and skipping and waving splayed arms, with little yelps of laughter and “Quà! ... Quà ...,” full of joy he tried to follow the flock.

There was a pond. The ducks flew onto the surface of the water and swam lightly off with closed wings. On reaching the pond the man flung himself on his belly into the water, raising huge splashes and thrashing his arms about. Then he tried another “Quà! Quà!” which ended in gurgles because he was sinking to the bottom. He reemerged, tried to swim and sank again.

“Is that the duck keeper, that man?” the warriors asked a peasant girl wandering along holding a reed.

“No, I keep the ducks; they’re mine. He has nothing to do with them. He’s Gurduloo,” said the little peasant girl.

“Then what was he doing with your ducks?”

“Oh nothing, every now and again he gets taken that way, and mistakes himself for one of them.”

“Does he think he’s a duck too?”

“He thinks the ducks are him. Gurduloo’s like that, a bit careless ...”

“Where’s he gone to now, though?”

The paladins neared the pond. There was no sign of Gurduloo. The ducks, having crossed the piece of water, now began waddling along the grass on their webbed feet. Around the pool, from among the reeds, rose a croak of frogs. Suddenly the man pulled his head out of the water as if he had, at that moment, remembered he had to breathe. He looked around in a daze, not understanding this fringe of reeds reflected in the water a few inches from his nose. On each reed leaf was sitting a small smooth green creature, looking at him and calling as loud as it could, “Gra! Gra! Gra!”

“Gra! Gra! Gra!” Gurduloo replied, pleased; and at the sound of his voice frogs began to leap from every reed into the water, and from the water onto the bank. Gurduloo yelled, “Gra!” gave a leap out too and reached the bank, soaking wet, muddy from head to foot, crouching like a frog and yelling such a loud “Gra!” that with a crash of bamboo and reeds he fell back into the pond.

“Won’t he drown?” the paladins asked a fisherman.

“Oh, sometimes Omoboo forgets himself, loses himself ... No, not drown ... The trouble is he’s apt to end in our net with the fishes ... One day it came over him when he’d started fishing. He flung the nets in the water, saw a fish just about to enter, and got so much into the part of the fish that he plunged into the water, and then into the net himself. You know what Omoboo's like ...”

“Omoboo? Isn’t his name Gurduloo?”

“Omoboo, we call him.”

“But that girl there ...”

“She doesn’t come from our parts, maybe she calls him that.”

“From what part is he?”

“Oh, he goes around ...”

The cavalcade was now skirting an orchard of pear trees. The fruit was ripe. The warriors pierced the pears with their lances, making them vanish into the beaks of their helmets, then spitting out the cores. And there in the middle of a pear tree who should they see but Gurduloo—Omoboo! He was sitting with raised arms twisted about like branches, and in his hands and mouth and on his head and in the rents of his clothes were pears.

“Look, he’s being a pear!” chortled Charlemagne.

“I’ll give him a shake!” said Roland, and swung him a hit.

Gurduloo let all the pears fall down. They rolled down the slope, and on seeing them roll he could not prevent himself from rolling around and around, down the field like a pear. And so he vanished from sight.

“Forgive him, Majesty!” said an old gardener. “Martinzoo sometimes doesn’t understand that his place is not amid trees or inanimate fruits, but among Your Majesty’s devoted subjects!”

“What on earth got into this madman you call Martinzoo?” asked the emperor graciously. “He doesn’t seem to me to know what’s going through that pate of his.”

“Who are we to understand, Majesty?” The old peasant was speaking with the modest wisdom of one who had seen a good deal of life. “Maybe mad’s not quite the right word for him. He’s just a person who exists and doesn’t realise he exists.”

“That’s a good one! We have a subject who exists but doesn't realise he does and there’s my paladin who thinks he exists but actually doesn’t They’d make a great pair, let me tell you!”

Charlemagne was tired now from the saddle. Leaning on his grooms, panting into his beard, puffing, “Poor France,” he dismounted. As soon as the emperor set foot to the ground, the whole army stopped and bivouacked. Cooking pots were put onto the fires.

“Bring me that Gurgur ... What’s his name?” exclaimed the king.

“It varies according to the place he’s in,” said the wise gardener, “and to the Christian or Infidel armies he attaches himself to. He’s Gurduroo or Gudi-Ussuf or Ben-Va-Ussuf or Ben-Stanbul or Pestanzoo or Bertinzoo or Martinbon or Omobon or Omobestia or even the Wild Man of the Valley or Gian Paciasso or Pier Paciugo. Maybe in out-of-the-way parts they give him quite a different name from the others. I’ve also noticed that his name changes from season to season everywhere. I’d say every name flows over him without sticking. Whatever he’s called it’s the same to him. Call him and he thinks you’re calling a goat. Say “cheese’ or ‘torrent’ and he answers ‘Here I am.’ ”

The paladins Sansonet and Dudon came up, dragging Gurduloo along as if he were a sack. They yanked him to his feet before Charlemagne. “Bare your head, beast! Don’t you see you are before your king?”

Gurduloo’s face lit up. It was a broad and flushed face, mingling Frankish and Moorish characteristics: red freckles scattered on olive skin, liquid blue eyes veined with blood above a snub nose, thick lips, fairish curly hair and a shaggy speckled beard, the hair stuck all over with chestnut and corn husks.

He began doubling into bows and talking very quickly. The noblemen around, who had only heard him produce animal sounds till then, were astounded. He spoke very hurriedly, eating his words and getting all entangled, sometimes passing, it seemed, without interruption, from one dialect to another or even one language to another, Christian or Moorish. Amid incomprehensible words and mistakes, the meaning of what he said was more or less, “I touch my nose with the earth. I fall to my feet at your knees. I declare myself an august servant of your most humble majesty. Order and I will obey myself!” He brandished a spoon tied to his belt “And when your majesty says, ‘I order command and desire,’ and do this with your scepter, as I do, with this, d’you see? And when you shout as I shout, ‘I orderrr commanddd and desirrrre!’ you subjects must all obey me or I’ll have you strung up, you first there with that beard and silly old face.”

“Shall I cut off his head at a stroke, sire?” asked Roland, unsheathing his sword.

“I implore grace for him, Majesty,” said the gardener. “It’s just one of his vagaries. When talking to the king he’s confused and can’t remember who is king, he or the person he’s talking to.”

From smoking vats came the smell of food.

“Give him a mess tin of soup!” said Charlemagne, with clemency.

Amidst grimaces, bows and incomprehensible speeches, Gurduloo retired under a tree to eat.

“What on earth’s he doing now?”

He was thrusting his head into the mess tin which he had put on the ground, as if he were trying to get into it. The good gardener went to shake him by a shoulder. “When will you understand, Martinzoo, that it’s you who must eat the soup, and not the soup you! Don’t you remember? You must put it to your mouth with a spoon.”

Gurduloo began lapping up spoonful after spoonful. So eagerly did he brandish the spoon that sometimes he missed his aim. In the tree under which he was sitting there was a cavity just by his head. Gurduloo now began to fling spoonfuls of soup into the hole in the tree.

“That’s not your mouth! It’s the tree’s!”

From the beginning Agilulf had followed with attention, mingled with distress, the movements of the man’s heavy, fleshly body, which seemed to wallow in existing, as naturally as a chick scratches. And he felt slightly faint.

“Agilulf!” exclaimed Charlemagne. “Know what? I assign you that man there as your squire! Eh? Isn't that a good idea?”

The paladins grinned ironically. But Agilulf, who took everything seriously (particularly any expression of the Imperial will), turned to his new squire in order to impart his first orders, only to find Gurduloo, after gulping down the soup, had fallen asleep in the shadow of that tree. He lay stretched out on the grass, snoring with an open mouth, his chest and belly rising and falling like a blacksmith’s bellows. The dirty mess tin had rolled near one of his big bare feet In the grass a hedgehog, attracted maybe by the smell, went up to the mess tin and began licking the last traces of soup. In doing this its prickles touched up against the bare sole of Gurduloo’s foot, and the more it licked up the last trickles of soup the more its prickles pressed on the bare foot Eventually the vagabond opened his eyes and rolled them around, without realising where that sensation of pain which had awoken him came from. He saw his bare foot standing upright in the grass like an Indian fig tree, and the prickle against his foot.

“Oh foot!” Gurduloo began to say. “Hey foot, I’m talking to you! What are you doing there like an idiot? Don’t you see that creature is tickling you? Oh f-o-o-o-t! Oh fool! Why don’t you pull yourself away? Don’t you feel it hurting? Fool of a foot! You need do so little, you need only move a tiny inch! Look how you're letting yourself be massacred! Foot! Just listen! Can’t you see you’re being taken advantage of? Pull over there, foot! Watch carefully now. See what I’m doing; I’ll show you ...” So saying he bent his knee, pulled his foot toward him and moved it away from the hedgehog. “There, it was quite easy, as soon as I showed you what to do you did it by yourself. Silly foot, why did you stay there so long and get yourself pricked?”

He rubbed the aching part, jumped up, began whistling, broke into a run, flung himself into the bushes, let out a fart, another, then vanished.

Agilulf began moving to try and find him, but where had he gone? The valley was striped with thickly sown fields of oats, clumps of arbutus, privet; and swept by breezes laden with pollen and butterflies, and above, by clusters of white clouds. Gurduloo had vanished in it all, down that slope where the sun was drawing mobile patterns of shadow and light He might be in any part of this or that slope.

From somewhere came a faint discordant song: “De stir les ponts de Bayonne ...”

The white armor of tall Agilulf stood high on the edge of the valley, its arms crossed on its chest.

“Well, when does the new squire begin his duties?” asked his colleagues.

Mechanically, in a voice without intonation, came Agilulf’s declaration. “A verbal statement by the emperor has the validity of an immediate decree.”

“De sur les ponts de Bayonne ...” came the voice still further away.





4


WORLD conditions were still confused in the era when this took place. It was not rare then to find names and thoughts and forms and institutions that corresponded to nothing in existence. But at the same time the world was polluted with objects and capacities and persons who lacked any name or distinguishing mark. It was a period when the will and determination to exist, to leave a trace, to rub up against all that existed, was not wholly used since there were many who did nothing about it—from poverty or ignorance or simply from finding things bearable as they were—and so a certain amount was lost into the void. Maybe too there came a point when this diluted will and consciousness of self was condensed, turned to sediment, as imperceptible watery particles condense into banks of clouds; and then maybe this sediment merged, by chance or instinct, with some name or family or military rank or duties or regulations, above all in an empty armor, for in times when armor was necessary even for a man who existed, how much more was it for one who didn’t. Thus it was that Agilulf of the Guildivern had begun to act and acquire glory for himself.

I who recount this tale am Sister Theodora, nun of the order of Saint Colomba. I am writing in a convent, from old unearthed papers or talk heard in our parlor, or a few rare accounts by people who were actually present We nuns have few occasions to speak with soldiers, so what I don't know I try to imagine. How else could I do it? Not all of the story is clear to me yet. I must crave indulgence. We country girls, however noble, have always led retired lives in remote castles and convents. Apart from religious ceremonies, triduums, novenas, gardening, harvesting, vintaging, whippings, slavery, incest, fires, hangings, invasion, sacking, rape and pestilence, we have had no experience. What can a poor nun know of the world? So I proceed laboriously with this tale whose narration I have undertaken as a penance. God alone knows how I shall describe the battle, I who by God’s grace have always been apart from such matters, except for half a dozen rustic skirmishes in the plain beneath our castle which we followed as children from the battlements amid caldrons of boiling pitch. (The unburied bodies that remained to rot afterwards in the fields we would come upon in our games next summer, beneath a cloud of hornets!) Of battles, as I say, I know nothing.

Nor did Raimbaut, though he had thought of little else in all his young life. This was his baptism of arms. He sat on horseback in line awaiting the signal for attack, but did not enjoy it He was wearing too much. The coat of chain mail with its neckband, the cuirass with gorge guard and shoulder plates, the sparrow’s beak helmet from which he could scarcely see out, a robe over the armor, a shield taller than himself, a lance which he banged on comrades’ heads every time he swung it, and beneath, a horse he couldn’t see, such were the caparisons of iron covering it.

The desire to avenge the killing of his father with the blood of the Argalif Isohar had almost left him. They had told him, looking at papers on which all the formations were set down, “When the trumpet sounds you gallop ahead in a straight line with set lance until you pierce him. Isohar always fights in that point of the line. If you keep straight you’re bound to run into him, unless the whole enemy army folds up, which never happens at the first impact. Of course there can always be some little deviation, but if you don’t pierce him your neighbor is sure to.” If such was the case Raimbaut cared no more about it.

Coughing was the signal that the battle had started. In the distance he saw a cloud of yellow dust advancing, and another cloud rising from the ground as the Christian horses broke into a canter. Raimbaut began coughing. The whole Imperial army coughed and shook in its armor, quivering and shaking as it raced towards the Infidel dust, hearing more coughing getting nearer and nearer. The two dusts fused, and the whole plain rang with the echo of coughs and the clang of lances.

The aim of the first encounter was not so much to pierce the enemy (as one risked breaking one’s lance against his shield and what’s more getting flung flat on one’s face from the shock) as unhorse him by thrusting a lance between his saddle and arse at the moment of wheeling. This was a risky business, as a lance pointing downwards can easily get entangled in some obstacle or even stick in the ground and jerk a rider right out of the saddle like a catapult. So the first contact was full of warriors flying through the air gripping their lances. And side movement being difficult, since lances could not be waved far without getting into a friend’s or enemy’s ribs, there was soon such a bottleneck that it was difficult to understand a thing. Then up galloped the champions and began clearing a way through the mêlée.

Then they too found themselves facing the enemy champions, shield to shield. Duels started, but already the ground was so covered with carcasses and corpses that it was difficult to move, and when they could not reach each other they yelled insults. Here rank and intensity of insult was decisive, for according to whether offense given was mortal—to be wiped out in blood—medium or light, various reparations were laid down or even implacable hatreds transmitted to descendants. So the important thing then was to understand each other, not an easy thing between Moors and Christians and with the various Moorish and Christian languages; what did one do if along came an insult one just couldn’t understand? One might find oneself swallowing it and being dishonored for life. So interpreters took part in this phase of the battle, light-armed men swiftly mounted on fast horses which swivelled around catching insults on the wing and translating them there and then into the language of destination.

“Khar as-Sus!”

“Worms’ excrement!”

“Mushrik! Sozo! Mozo! Enclavao! Marrano! Hijo de puta! Zabdkan! Merde!”

These interpreters, by tacit agreement on both sides, were not to be killed. Anyway they galloped swiftly away and if it wasn’t easy in that confusion to kill a heavy warrior mounted on a charger which could scarcely move for its encrustation of armor, imagine how difficult it was with these grasshoppers. But war is war, as the saying goes, and every now and again one did catch it. Anyway, even with the excuse of knowing how to say “Son of a whore” in a couple of languages, they had to expect some risk. On a battlefield anyone with a quick hand can get good results, particularly at the right moment, before the hordes of infantry swarm over and mess up all they touch.

Infantry, being short little men, pick things up best, but knights from up on their saddles are apt to stun them with the flats of their swords and haul up the best loot for themselves. “Loot” does not mean things tom off the backs of the dead, as it takes special concentration to strip a corpse, but all that gets dropped. Since knights go into battle loaded with supplementary harness, at the first clash a mess of disparate objects falls to the ground. After that no one can think of fighting, can he? The struggle now is to gather everything up. In the evening on returning to camp the men bargain and traffic in the loot On the whole nearly always the same things pass from camp to camp and regiment to regiment in the same camp; what is war, after all, but this passing of more and more dented objects from hand to hand?

Raimbaut found all that happened quite different from what he had been told. On he rushed, lance forward, in tense expectation of the meeting between the two ranks. Meet they did but all seemed calculated for each knight to pass through the space between two enemies without his even grazing another.

For a time the two ranks continued to rush on, each in its own direction, each turning its back to the other. Then they turned and tried to come to grips, but by now impetus was lost. Who could ever find the Argalif in the middle of all that? Raimbaut found himself clashing shields with a man hard as dried fish. Neither of the two seemed to have any intention of giving way to the other. They pushed against their shields, while the horses stuck their hooves in the ground.

The Moor, who had a face pale as putty, spoke.

“Interpreter!” yelled Raimbaut “What’s he saying?”

Up trotted one of those lazybones. “He's saying you must give way to him!”

“Oh, not by my throat.”

The interpreter translated; the other replied.

“He says he’s got to go on and get a certain job done, or the battle won’t work out according to plan...”

“I’ll let him pass if he tells me where I can find Isohar the Argalif!”

The Moor waved towards a hillock and shouted. The interpreter said, “Over there on that rise to the left!” Raimbaut turned and galloped off.

The Argalif, draped in green, was staring at the horizon.

“Interpreter!”

“Here I am.”

“Tell him I’m son of the Marquis Roussillon, come to avenge my father.”

The interpreter translated. The Argalif raised a hand with fingers clenched.

“Who’s he?”

“Who’s my father? That’s your last insult!” Raimbaut bared his sword. The Argalif imitated him. He was a good swordsman. Raimbaut was already hard pressed when up came the Moor with the putty face, panting hard and shouting something.

“Stop, sir!” translated the interpreter hurriedly. “I’m so sorry, I got confused. The Argalif Isohar is on the hillock to the right! This is the Argalif Abdul!”

“Thank you! You’re a man of honor!” said Raimbaut, then moved his horse, saluted the Argalif with his sword and galloped off toward the other slope.

At the news that Raimbaut was the son of the Marquis, the Argalif Isohar said, “What’s that?” It had to be repeated more than once in his ear, very loud.

Eventually he yawned and raised his sword. Raimbaut rushed at him. And as their swords crossed doubt came over him as to whether this was Isohar either, and his impetus was rather blunted. He tried to work himself into a frenzy, but the more he hit out the less he felt sure of his enemy’s identity.

This uncertainty was nearly fatal. The Moor was pressing closer and closer when a great row went up nearby. A Moorish officer in the press of the battle suddenly let out a cry.

At this shout Raimbaut’s adversary raised his visor as if asking for a truce, and called out in reply.

“What’s he say?” Raimbaut asked the interpreter.

“He said, ‘Yes, Argalif Isohar, I’ll bring your spectacles at once!’ ”

“So it’s not him!”

“I am the Argalif Isohar’s spectacle bearer,” exclaimed his adversary. “Spectacles are instruments as yet unknown to you Christians, and are lenses to correct the sight Isohar, being short-sighted, is forced to wear them in battle, but as they’re glass a pair gets broken at every fight. I’m attached to him to supply new ones. May I therefore request that we interrupt our duel, otherwise the Argalif, weak of sight as he is, will get the worst of it.”

“Ah, the spectacle bearer!” roared Raimbaut not knowing whether to gut him in a rage or rush at the real Isohar. But what merit would there be in fighting a blind adversary?

“Do let me go, sir,” went on the optician, “as the plan of battle depends on his keeping in good health, and if he doesn’t see he’s lost!” and brandishing the spectacles he shouted back, “Here Argalif, here are the glasses!”

“No!” said Raimbaut, and slashed at the bits of glass, shattering them.

At the same instant, as if the sound of lenses in smithereens had been a sign of his end, Isohar was pierced by a Christian lance.

“Now,” said the optician, “he doesn’t need glasses to gaze at the houris in Paradise,” and off he spurred.

The corpse of the Argalif, lurched over the saddle, remained hitched to the stirrups by the legs, and the horse dragged it up to Raimbaut’s feet.

The emotion at seeing Isohar dead on the ground, contradictory thoughts assailing him—of triumph at being able finally to say his father’s blood was avenged, of doubt whether he had actually killed the Argalif by fracturing his spectacles and so could consider the vendetta duly consummated, of confusion at finding himself suddenly deprived of the aim which had brought him so far—all lasted only a moment. Then he felt a wonderful sense of lightness at finding himself rid of that nagging thought in the middle of battle, and able to rush about, look round, fight, as if his feet had wings.

In his fixation about killing the Argalif he had paid no attention to the order of battle, and did not even think there was any. Everything seemed new to him, and exaltation and honor seemed to touch him only now. The earth already had its crop of dead. Fallen in their armor, they lay in awkward postures, according to how their greaves and joints or other iron accouterments had settled in a heap, sometimes with arms or legs in the air. At points the heavy armor had been breached, and from its interior stuffed guts spilled out of every gash. Such ghastly sights filled Raimbaut with honor. Had he perhaps forgotten that it was warm human blood that had moved and given vigor to all those wrappings? To all except one—or did the unseizable nature of the knight in white armor seem extended over the whole field of battle?

On he spurred, anxious to face living presences, friends or foes.

He found himself in a valley, deserted apart from the dead and flies buzzing over them. The battle had reached a moment of truce, or was raging on some quite other part of the field. Raimbaut was gazing around as he rode. There was a clatter of hooves; on the crest of a hill appeared a mounted warrior. A Moor! He looked around, reined in, then spurred his horse and galloped off. Raimbaut spurred too and followed. Now he was on the hills too. In the plain he saw the Moor galloping off and vanishing among the nut trees. Raimbaut’s horse was like an arrow; it seemed to be longing for the chance of a race. The youth was pleased. Beneath those inanimate shells at last, a horse was a horse, a man a man. The Moor veered off to the right. Why? Now Raimbaut felt certain of catching up. But from the right now appeared another Moor, who jumped out of the undergrowth and barred his way. Then both infidels turned and came at him: an ambush! Raimbaut flung himself forward with raised sword and cried, “Cowards!”

One came at him, his black two-pronged helmet like a hornet. The youth parried and banged the other’s shield, but his horse shied. Now the first Moor began pressing him, and Raimbaut had to make play with shield and sword and get his horse to twist round in its tracks by pressing his knees to its sides. “Cowards!” he cried, and his rage was real, and his fight was a real fight, and the effort to hold at bay two enemies was agonizingly exhausting in bone and blood, and maybe Raimbaut must die now that he is sure the world exists, and does now know if dying is more sad or less.

Both were on him now. He backed, seizing the hilt of his sword as if stuck to it; if he lost it he was done. At that extreme moment he heard a gallop. At the sound, as at a roll of drums, both his enemies broke away. They backed, protecting themselves with raised shields. Raimbaut turned too; beside him he saw a knight of the Christian armies with a robe of periwinkle blue over his armor. A crest of long feathers also periwinkle in color waved from his helmet. Swiftly turning a light lance the warrior kept the Moors at bay.

Now they were side by side; Raimbaut and the unknown knight. The latter was still brandishing his lance. Of the two enemies one tried to feint and bounce the lance out of his hand, but the periwinkle knight at that moment put his lance into its socket on his saddle, bared his sword, and flung himself on the Infidel. They duelled. Raimbaut, seeing how lightly the unknown helper handled his sword, almost forgot everything else to sit still and look. But it was only a moment; soon the other enemy launched himself with a great clash of shields.

So he went on fighting side by side with the periwinkle knight. Every time the enemy after a useless new assault found themselves backing, one took on the other’s adversary with a rapid exchange, so confusing them with their different techniques. Fighting side by side with a companion is far nicer than fighting alone. Each encourages the other, and the feeling of having an enemy and that of having a friend fuse in similar warmth.

Raimbaut often shouted incitement to the other; but the warrior was silent The young man realised that in battle one must save one’s breath and was also silent, though rather sorry not to hear his comrade’s voice.

The tussle grew fiercer. Then the periwinkle knight unhorsed his Moor; the latter escaped on foot into the undergrowth. The other rushed at Raimbaut but in the clash broke his sword; afraid of falling prisoner he too turned his horse and fled.

“Thanks, brother,” exclaimed Raimbaut to his helper, opening his visor. “You’ve saved my life!” And he held out his hand. “My name is Raimbaut, son of the Marquis of Roussillon, squire.”

The periwinkle knight did not reply, nor did he give his own name or shake Raimbaut’s extended right hand or uncover his face. The youth flushed. “Why don’t you answer me?” And at that moment what should the other do but turn his horse and gallop off! “Hey, knight even if I do owe you my life, I consider this a mortal insult!” yelled Raimbaut, but the periwinkle knight was already far away.

Gratitude to his unknown helper, mute community born in battle, anger at that unexpected rebuff, curiosity at that mystery, excitement temporarily appeased by victory, and immediately on the lookout for other objectives—that was Raimbaut. He spurred his horse after the periwinkle warrior. “You’ll pay for this insult, whoever you are!”

He spurred and spurred but his horse did not budge. He pulled its bit, and its snout dropped. He shook himself in the saddle. The horse gave a quiver as if made of wood. Then he dismounted, raised its iron mask and saw its white eye; it was dead. A blow from a Moor’s sword had penetrated the chinks of the caparisons and pierced the heart. The animal would have crashed to the ground long before had not the iron pieces around his flank and legs kept it rigid, as if rooted to the spot. Sorrow for a valorous charger killed on its feet after serving him faithfully conquered Raimbaut’s rage a moment. He threw his arms around the neck of the horse that was standing there like a statue, and kissed it on its cold snout Then he shook himself, dried his tears and ran off on foot.

But where could he go? He found himself running over vaguely marked paths, beside a stream deep in woods, with no more sign of battle around him. All trace of the unknown warrior had vanished. Raimbaut meandered on, resigned now to losing him, but still thinking, “I’ll find him again, though it’s at the very end of the world!”

What tormented him most now, after that blazing morning, was thirst. As he climbed down towards the surface of the stream to drink he heard branches moving. Tied to a nut tree by a loose bridle rein was a horse cropping at the grass, relieved of its biggest pieces of armor, which were lying nearby. There was no doubt; it was the horse of the unknown warrior, and the knight could not be very far away! Raimbaut flung himself among the reeds to find him.

He reached the river bank, put his head between the leaves; there was the warrior. Head and torso, like a crab’s, were still enclosed in armor and in the impenetrable helmet, but the knee and hip pieces had been taken off, and the warrior was naked from the waist downwards and running barefoot over rocks in the stream.

Raimbaut could not believe his eyes. For the naked flesh was a woman’s: a smooth gold-flecked belly, round rosy hips, long straight girl’s legs. This half of a girl (the crab half now had an even more inhuman and expressionless aspect than ever) was turning round and looking for a suitable spot, set one foot on one side and one foot on the other side of a trickle of water, bent knees slightly, leant on the ground, arms covered with iron bands, pushed the head forward and the behind back and began quietly and proudly to pee. She was a woman of harmonious moons, tender plumage, and gentle waves. Raimbaut fell head over heels in love with her on the spot.

The young Amazon went down to the stream, lowered herself into the water again, made quick ablutions, shivering slightly, then ran up again with little skips of her bare pink feet. It was then that she noticed Raimbaut peering at her between the reeds. “Schwein Hund!” she cried, pulled a dagger from her waist and threw it at him, not with the gesture of a perfect manager of weapons that she was, but with the impetus of a furious woman throwing at a man's head a plate or brush or whatever else she happens to have in her hand.

Anyway she missed Raimbaut’s forehead by a hair’s-breadth. The youth, ashamed, drew back. But a moment later he longed to reappear before her and reveal his feelings to her in some way. He heard a clatter and rushed to the field. The horse was no longer there; she had vanished. The sun was declining; only now did he realise that the entire day had gone by.

Tired, on foot, too stunned by so many things that had happened to feel happy, too happy to understand that he had exchanged his former preoccupation for even more burning anxieties, he returned to the camp.

"I’ve avenged my father, you know. I’ve won. Isohar has fallen. I...” but he told his tale confusedly, overhurriedly, since the point he wanted to reach was another. “And I was fighting against two of them, and a knight came to help me, and then I found out it wasn’t a soldier, it was a woman, lovely, the face I don’t know, in armor she wore a periwinkle blue robe...”

“Ha, ha, ha,” roared his companions in the tent; intent on spreading grease on the bruises all over their chests and arms, amid the great stink of sweat which is present every time armor comes off after battle. “So you want to go with Bradamante, do you, little one? If she wants! Bradamante only takes on generals or grooms! You won’t get her, not even if you put salt on your tail!"

Raimbaut could not bring out a word. He left the tent; the sun was setting red. Only the day before, when seeing the sun go down, he had asked himself, “Where will I be at tomorrow’s sunset? Will I have passed the test? Will I be confirmed as a man, making a mark in the world?” And now here he was at that next day’s dusk, and the first tests were over. But now nothing counted any longer. There was a new test, and the new test was difficult, unexpected, and could be confirmed only there. In this state of uncertainty Raimbaut would have liked to confide in the knight with white armor, as the only one who might understand him; he had no idea why.





5


BENEATH my cell is the convent kitchen. As I write I can hear the clatter of copper and earthenware as the sisters wash platters from our meager refectory. To me the abbess has assigned a different task, the writing of this tale. But all our labors in the convent have, as it were, one aim and purpose alone, the health of the soul. Yesterday, when I was writing of the battle, I seemed to hear in the sink’s din the clash of lance against shield and armor plate, and the clang of heavy swords on helmets. From beyond the courtyard came the thudding of looms as nuns wove, and to me it seemed like the pounding of galloping horses’ hooves. Thus, what reached my ears was transformed by my half-closed eyes into visions and by my silent lips into words and words and words, and on my pen rushed over the white sheet to catch up.

Today perhaps the air is hotter, the smell of cabbage stronger, my mind lazier, and the hubbub of nuns washing up can transport me no further than the field kitchens of the Frankish army. I see warriors in rows before steaming vats amid a constant clatter of mess tins and tinkle of spoons, of ladles on edges of mess tins, or scraping the bottom of empty encrusted cooking pots; and this sight and smell of cabbage is repeated in every regiment, from those of Normandy, Burgundy, and Anjou.

If an army’s power is measured by the din it makes, then the resounding array of the Franks can best be known at mealtimes. The sound echoes over valleys and plains, till eventually it joins and merges with a similar echo, from Infidel pots. For the enemy too are intent at the very same time on gulping foul cabbage soup. Yesterday’s battle never made so much noise—nor such stink.

All I have to do next is imagine the heroes of my tale at the kitchens. I see Agilulf appear amid the smoke and bend over a vat, insensible to the smell of cabbage, making suggestions to the cooks of the regiment of Auvergne. Now up comes young Raimbaut, at a run.

“Knight,” says he, panting, “at last I’ve found you! Now I want to be a paladin too! During yesterday’s battle I had my revenge ... in the mêlée ... then I was all alone against two ... an ambush ... then ... now I know what fighting is, in fact. And I want to be given the riskiest place in battle ... or to set off on some adventure that will gain glory ... for our holy faith ... to save women and sick and weak and old ... you can tell me...”

Agilulf, before turning round, stood there for a moment with his back to him, in sign of annoyance at being interrupted in the course of duty. Then, when he did turn, he began to talk in rapid polished phrases which betrayed enjoyment at his masterly grasp of a subject put to him at a moment’s notice, and of the competence of his exposé.

“From what you say, apprentice, you appear to believe that our rank as paladins consists exclusively of covering ourselves with glory, whether in battle at the head of troops, or in bold individual tasks, the latter either in defense of our holy faith or in assistance of women, aged and sick. Have I taken your meaning well?"

“Yes.”

“Well, then, what you have suggested are in fact activities particularly recommended to our corps of chosen officers, but...” and here Agilulf gave a little laugh, the first Raimbaut had heard from the white helmet, a laugh courteous and ironic at the same time “... but those are not the sole ones. If you so desire, it would be easy for me to list one by one duties allotted to Simple Paladins, Paladins First Class, Paladins of the General Staff...”

Raimbaut interrupted him. “All I need is to follow you and take you as an example, knight”

“You prefer to set experience before doctrines then; that’s admissible. Yet today you see me doing my turn of inspection as I do every Wednesday, on behalf of the Quartermaster’s Department. As such I am about to inspect the kitchens of the regiments of Auvergne and Poitiers. If you follow me, you can gain some experience in this difficult branch of service.”

This was not what Raimbaut had expected, and he felt rather put out. But not wanting to contradict himself he pretended to pay attention to what Agilulf did and said with cooks, vintners and scullions, still hoping that this was but a preparatory ritual before tushing into some dashing feat of arms.

Agilulf counted and recounted allocations of food, rations of soup, numbers of mess tins to be filled and contents of vats. “Even more difficult than commanding an army, you know,” he explained to Raimbaut, “is calculating how many tins of soup one of these vats contains. It never works out in any regiment. Either there are rations which can’t be traced or put on returns or—if allocations are reduced—there are not enough to go round and discontent flares up among the troops. Of course every military kitchen has hangers-on of different kinds, old women, cripples and so on, who come for what’s left over. But that’s all very irregular, of course. To clear things up, I have arranged for every regiment to make a return of its strength including even the names of such poor as usually line up for rations. We can then know exactly where every mess tin of soup goes. Now to get practice in your paladin’s duties, you can go and make a tour of regimental kitchens, with the lists, and check that all is in order. Then you will report back to me.”

What was Raimbaut to do? To refuse, demand glory or nothing? If he did he risked ruining his career over nonsense. He went.

He returned bored, no clearer than before. “Oh, yes, it seems to be all right,” he said to Agilulf, “though it’s certainly all very confused And those poor folk who come for soup, are they all brothers by any chance?”

“Why brothers?”

“Oh, they’re so alike ... In fact they might be mistaken for each other. Every regiment has its own, just like those of the others. At first I thought it was the same man moving from kitchen to kitchen. But on the list there were different names: Boamoluz, Carotun, Balingaccio, Bertel. Then I asked the sergeants, and checked; yes, he always corresponded. Though surely that similarity...”

“I’ll go and see for myself.”

They moved towards the lines of Lorraine. “There, that man over there,” and Raimbaut pointed as if someone was there. There was, in fact, but at first sight, what with green and yellow rags faded and patched all over, and a face covered with freckles and a ragged beard, the eye was apt to pass him over and confuse him with the color of earth and leaves.

“But that’s Gurduloo!”

“Gurduloo? Yet another name! D’you know him?”

“He’s a man without a name and with every possible name. Thank you, apprentice, not only have you laid bare an irregularity in our organization, but you have given me the chance of refinding the squire assigned to me by the emperor’s order, and lost at once.”

The Lorraine cooks, having finished distributing rations to the troops, now left the vat to Gurduloo. “Here, all this soup’s for you!”

“All is soup!” exclaimed Gurduloo, bending over the pot as if leaning over a window sill, and taking great sweeps with his spoon to bring off the most delicious part of the contents, the crust stuck to the sides.

“All is soup!” resounded his voice from inside the vat, which tipped over at his onslaught.

Gurduloo was now imprisoned in the overturned pot. His spoon could be heard banging like a cracked bell, and his voice moaning, “All is soup!” Then the vat moved like a tortoise, turned over again, and Gurduloo reappeared.

He had cabbage soup spattered, smeared, all over him from head to toe, and was stained with blacking. With liquid sticking up his eyes he felt blind and came on screeching, “All is soup!” with his hands forward as if swimming, seeing nothing but the soup covering eyes and face, “All is soup!” brandishing the spoon in one hand as if wanting to draw to himself spoonfuls of everything around, “All is soup!”

Raimbaut found this so disturbing that it made his head go round, not so much with disgust as doubt at the possibility of that man in front of him being right and the world being nothing but a vast shapeless mass of soup in which all things dissolved and tinged all else with itself. “Help! I don’t want to become soup,” he was about to shout, but Agilulf was standing impassively near him with arms crossed, as if quite remote and untouched by the squalid scene, and Raimbaut felt that he could never understand his own apprehension. The anguish which the sight of the warrior in white armor always made him feel was now counterbalanced by this new anguish caused by Gurduloo. This thought saved his balance and made him calm again.

“Why don’t you make him realise that all isn’t soup and put an end to this saraband of his?” he said to Agilulf, managing to speak in a tone without trace of annoyance.

“The only way to cope with him is to give him a clear-cut job to do,” said Agilulf, and to Gurduloo, “You are my squire, by order of Charles King of the Franks and Holy Roman Emperor. From now on you must obey me in all things. And as I am charged by the Superintendency for Inhumation and Compassionate Duties to provide for the burial of those killed in yesterday’s battle, I will provide you with stake and spade and we will proceed to the field to bury the baptized flesh of our brethren whom God now has in glory.”

He also asked Raimbaut to follow him and so take note of this other delicate task of a paladin.

All three walked towards the field; Agilulf with his step which was intended to be loose but was actually like walking on nails, Raimbaut with eyes staring all round, impatient to see again the places he had passed the day before beneath a hail of darts and blows, Gurduloo, with spade and stake on his shoulder, not at all impressed by the solemnity of his duties, singing and whistling.

From a rise could be seen the plain where the crudest fighting had taken place. The soil was covered with corpses. Vultures sat, with talons grappling the shoulders or the faces of the dead, and bent their beaks to peck gutted bellies.

The behavior of these vultures can scarcely be called appealing. Down they swoop as a battle nears its end, when the field is already strewn with dead lying about like Roman soldiers in steel breastplates, which the birds' beaks tap without even scratching. Scarcely has evening fallen when, silently, from opposite camps, crawling on all fours, come the corpse despoilers. The vultures rise and begin wheeling in the sky waiting for them to finish. First light glimmers on a battlefield whitish with naked corpses. Down the vultures come again and begin their great meal. But they have to hurry, as gravediggers are soon coming to deny the birds what they concede to the worms.

Agilulf and Raimbaut with blows of their swords, Gurduloo with his pole, thrashed off the black visitors and made them fly away. Then they set to their sorry task. Each of the three chose a corpse, took it by the feet and dragged it up the hill to a place suitable for scooping a grave.

As Agilulf dragged a corpse along he thought, “Oh corpse, you have what I never had or will have: a carcass. Or rather you have, you are this carcass, that which at times, in moments of despondency, I find myself envying in men who exist. Fine! I can truly call myself privileged, I who can live without it and do all; all, of course, which seems most important to me. Many things I manage to do better than those who exist, since I lack their usual defects of coarseness, carelessness, incoherence, smell. It’s true that someone who exists always has a particular attitude of his own to things, which I never managed to have. But if their secret is merely here, in this bag of guts, then I can do without it. This valley of disintegrating naked corpses disgusts me no more than the flesh of living human beings.”

As Gurduloo dragged a corpse along he thought “Corpsey, your farts stink even more than mine. I don’t know why everyone mourns you so. What’s it you lack? Before you used to move, now your movement is passed on to the worms you nourish. Once you grew nails and hair, now you’ll ooze slime which will make grass in the fields grow higher towards the sun. You will become grass, then milk for cows which will eat the grass, blood of the baby that drinks their milk, and so on. Don’t you see you get more out of life than I do, corpsey?”

As Raimbaut dragged a dead man along he thought, “Oh corpse, I have come rushing here only to be dragged along by the heels like you. What is this frenzy that drives me, this mania for battle and for love, seen from the place where your staring eyes gaze, and your flung-back head that knocks over stones? I think of that, corpse; you make me think of that: but does anything change? Nothing. No other days exist but these of ours before the tomb, both for us the living and for you the dead. May it be granted me not to waste them, not to waste anything of what I am, of what I could be: to do deeds helpful to the Frankish cause; to embrace, to be embraced by proud Bradamante. I hope you spent your days no worse, oh corpse. Anyway to you the dice have already shown their numbers. For me they are still swirling in the box. And I love my own anxiety, corpse, not your peace.”

Gurduloo, singing, began arranging to scoop out his corpse’s grave. He stretched it on the ground to take its measurement, marked the edges with his spade, moved it, and began digging at full speed. “Corpsey, maybe you’ll get bored waiting there.” He turned it over on a side, towards the grave, so as to keep it in view as he dug. “Corpsey, you might help with a spadeful or two yourself.” He straightened it up, tried to put in its hand a spade, which fell. “Enough. You’re not capable. I see I’ll have to dig it out myself, then you can fill the grave up.”

The grave was dug, but so messy was Gurduloo’s work that it turned out a strange irregular concave shape. Then Gurduloo decided to try it out. In he got and lay down. “Oh, how cosy it is, how comfy! What soft earth! How nice to turn over! Corpsey, do come and feel this lovely grave I’ve dug for you!” Then he thought a bit. “However, we’ve agreed that you must fill the grave, and it would be best if I stay down there, and you shovel the earth on me!” He waited a little, then, “Come on! Quick! It’s nothing! This is the way!” And from where he was lying down in the grave he began shovelling earth down by raising his spade. And the whole heap of earth fell down on top of him.

Agilulf and Raimbaut heard a muffled cry, whether of alarm or satisfaction at finding himself so well buried they did not know. They were just in time to extract Gurduloo, all covered with earth, before he died of suffocation.

The knight found Gurduloo’s work ill done and Raimbaut’s insufficient. He himself had traced out a whole little cemetery, marking the verges of rectangular graves, parallel to the two sides of an alley.

On their return in the evening they passed a clearing in the woods where carpenters of the Frankish army were cutting tree trunks for war machines and fires.

“Now, Gurduloo, cut wood.”

But Gurduloo swung blows in all directions with his ax and put together kindling twigs and green wood and saplings of maidenhair fern and shrub of arbutus and bits of bark covered with mould.

The knight inspected the carpenters’ ax work, their tools and stacks, and explained to Raimbaut the duties of a paladin for provisioning wood. Raimbaut was not listening. All that time a question had been burning in his throat, and now, when his outing with Agilulf was near its end, he had not put it to him yet. “Sir Agilulf!” he interrupted.

“What d’you want?” asked Agilulf, fingering an ax.

The youth did not know where to begin, did not know how to approach the only subject close to his heart. So, blushing, he said, “D’you know Bradamante?”

At this name, Gurduloo, just coming up clutching one of his composite bundles, gave a start. In the air scattered a flight of twigs, honeysuckle tendrils, juniper bunches, privet branches.

Agilulf was holding a sharp two-edged ax. He brandished it, and buried it in the trunk of an oak tree. The ax passed right through the tree and cut it neatly, but the tree did not move from its trunk, so clean had been the blow.

“What’s the matter, Sir Agilulf?” exclaimed Raimbaut with a start of alarm. “What’s come over you?”

Agilulf with crossed arms was now examining all round the trunk. “D’you see?” he said to the young man. “A clean blow, without the slightest waver. Observe how straight the cut.”





6


THIS tale I have undertaken is even harder to write than I thought. Now it is my duty to describe that greatest of mortal follies, the passion of love, from which my vow, the cloister and my natural shyness have saved me till now. I do not say I have not heard it spoken of. In fact here in the convent, so as to keep on guard against temptations, we sometimes discuss it as best we can with the vague notions we have about it, particularly whenever any of our poor inexperienced girls is made pregnant or raped by some powerful godless man and returns to tell us all that was done to her. So of love as of war I shall give a picture as best I can imagine it. The art of writing tales consists in an ability to draw the rest of life from the nothing one has understood of it, but life begins again at the end of the page when one realises that one knew nothing whatsoever.

Did Bradamante know more? In spite of that Amazon life of hers, a deep disquiet was growing within her. She had taken to the life of chivalry due to her love for all that was strict, exact, severe, conforming to moral rule and—in the management of arms and horses—to exact precision of movement. But what was around her now? Sweating louts who seemed to wage war in a very slack and slovenly manner, and who after duty were always mooning around her like boobies to see which of them she would decide to take back to her tent that night. For although knightly chivalry is a fine thing, knights themselves are crude, accustomed to doing great deeds in a slapdash way, only just keeping within the sancrosanct rules which they have sworn to follow and which, being so firmly fixed, take away any bother of thinking. War anyway is made up of a bit of slaughter and a bit of routine and doesn’t bear being looked into too closely.

Bradamante was no different from them at heart; maybe she had got those ideas about severity and rigor into her head as contrast to her real nature. For instance, if ever there was a slattern in the whole army of France, it was she. To start with, her tent was the untidiest in the whole camp. While poor menfolk had to get down to work they considered womanish, such as washing clothes, mending, sweeping floors, tidying up, she, having been brought up a princess, refused to touch a thing. Had it not been for those old washerwomen and dish washers who always hang round troops—procuresses, the lot of them—her tent would have been worse than a kennel. Anyway, she was never in it. Her day began when she put on her armor and mounted her saddle. In fact, no sooner was she armed than she became another person, gleaming from the tip of her helmet to her greaves, each piece of armor more perfect than the last, with periwinkle tassels all over the robe covering her cuirass, each carefully in place. Her wish to be the most resplendent figure on the battlefield was an expression not so much of feminine vanity as of her constant challenge to the paladins, her superiority over them, her pride. In a warrior, friend or foe, she expected a perfection of turnout and weapon management as a reflection of similar perfection of soul. And if she happened to meet a champion who seemed to respond in some measure to her expectations, then there awoke in her the woman of strong amorous appetites. But there again, so it was said, she gave the lie to her own rigid ideals, for as a lover she was at one and the same time furious and tender. But if a man followed her in utter abandon, lost his self-control, she at once fell out of love or went searching for a temperament more adamantine. Whom could she now find, though? Not one of the Christian or enemy champions had ascendancy over her any more. She knew the weaknesses and fatuity of them all.

She was exercising at archery, in the space before her tent, when Raimbaut, who was wandering anxiously in search of her, saw her for the first time in the face. She was dressed in a short tunic; her bare arms were holding the bow, her face was a little strained with the effort; her hair was tied on the nape of her neck, then spread in a big fantail. But Raimbaut's look did not pause on details. He saw the woman as a whole, her person, her colors, and felt it could only be she, she whom, without having yet seen her, he desperately desired. For him, from now on, she could never be different.

The arrow winged from the bow, and pierced the target in an exact line with the other three which she had already put there. “I challenge you to an archery competition!” said Raimbaut, hurrying towards her.

Thus does a young man always hurry towards his woman. But is he truly urged by love for her, and not by love of himself? Isn’t he looking for a certainty of existing that only a woman can give him? A young man hurries, falls in love, uncertain of himself, happy, desperate, and for him his woman is the person who certainly exists, of which only she can give the proof. But the woman too either exists or not There she is before him, also trembling, and uncertain. How is it the young man does not understand that? What does it matter which of the two is strong and which weak? They are equals. But that the young man does not know, because he does not want to. What he yearns for is a woman who exists, a woman who is definite. She, on the other hand, knows more things, or less, anyway things that are different. What she is in search of is a different way of existing, and together they have a competition in archery. She shouts at him, does not appreciate him. He does not know that is part of her game. Around them are pavilions of the Frankish army, pennants in the wind, rows of horses eating fodder at last. Retainers prepare the paladins’ meals. The latter, waiting for the dinner hour, are grouped around watching Bradamante at archery with the boy. Says Bradamante, “You hit the target all right but it's always by chance!”

“By chance? But I don’t put an arrow wrong!”

“If you didn’t put a hundred arrows wrong it would still be by chance!”

“What isn’t by chance then? Who can do anything but by chance?”

On the edge of the field Agilulf was slowly passing. On his white armor hung a long black mantle. He was walking along like one who wants to avoid looking but knows he is being looked at himself, and thinks he should show that he does not care, while on the other hand he does, though in a different way than others may think.

“Sir knight, come and show him how ...” Bradamante’s voice had lost its usual contemptuous tone and her bearing its arrogance. She took two paces towards Agilulf and offered him the bow with an arrow already set in it.

Slowly Agilulf came closer, took the bow, drew back his cloak, put one foot behind the other and moved arms and bow forward. His movements were not those of muscles and nerves concentrating on a good aim. He was ordering his forces by will power, setting the tip of the arrow at the invisible line of the target; he moved the bow very slightly and no more, and let fly. The arrow was bound to hit the target. Bradamante cried, “A fine shot!”

Agilulf did not care, he held tight in his iron fist the still quivering bow. Then he let it fall and gathered his mantle around him, holding it close in both fists against his breastplate; and so he moved off. He had nothing to say and had said nothing.

Bradamante set her bow again, raised it with taut arms, shook the ends of her hair on her shoulders. “Who or who else could shoot such a neat bow? Whoever else could be so exact and perfect as he in his every act?” So saying she kicked away the grassy tufts and broke her arrows against palisades. Agilulf was already far off and did not turn. His iridescent crest was bent forward as if he were walking bent with arms tight across his steel chest, his black cloak dragging.

Of the warriors gathered around one or two sat on the grass to enjoy the scene of Bradamante’s frenzy. “Since she’s fallen in love with Agilulf like this the poor girl hasn’t had a moment’s peace...”

“What? What’s that you say?” Raimbaut had caught the phrase, and gripped the arm of the man who had spoken.

“Hey you, little chick, puff your chest out for our little paladiness if you like! Now she only likes armor that’s clean inside and out! Don’t you know she is head over heels in love with Agilulf?”

“But how can that be ... Agilulf ... Bradamante ... How?”

“How? Well, if a girl has had enough of every man who exists, her only remaining desire could be for a man who doesn’t exist at all...”

Raimbaut found it was becoming a kind of natural instinct, in every moment of doubt and discouragement, to feel he wanted to consult the knight in the white armor. He felt this now, but did not know if he was to ask his advice again or face him as a rival.

“Hey, blondie, isn’t he a bit of a lightweight for bed?” her fellow warriors called. Now Bradamante must be in a real decline. As if once upon a time anyone would have dared talk to her in that tone!

“Say,” insisted the cheeky voices, “suppose you strip him, what d’you get?” and they roared with laughter.

Raimbaut felt a double anguish at hearing Bradamante and the knight spoken of so and rage at realising that he did not come into the discussion at all and that no one considered him in the least connected with it.

Bradamante had now armed herself with a whip and was swirling it in the air to disperse bystanders, Raimbaut among them. “Don’t you think I’m woman enough to make any man do whatever I want him to?”

Off they ran shouting, “Uh! Uh! If you’d like us to lend him a bit of something, Bradamá, don’t hesitate to ask!”

Raimbaut, urged on by the others, followed the group of jeering warriors until they dispersed. Now he had no desire to return to Bradamante. Even Agilulf’s company would have made him ill at ease. By chance he found himself walking beside another youth called Torrismund, younger son of the Duke of Cornwall, who was slouching along, staring glumly at the ground and whistling. Raimbaut walked on with this youth, who was almost unknown to him, and feeling a need to express himself began talking. “I’m new here. I don’t know, it’s not like I thought, I can’t catch it, one never seems to get anywhere, it all seems quite incomprehensible.”

Torrismund did not raise his eyes, just interrupted his glum whistling for a moment and said, “It’s all quite foul."

“Well, you know,” answered Raimbaut, “I wouldn’t be so pessimistic, there are moments when I feel full of enthusiasm, even of admiration, as if I understand everything at last, and eventually I say to myself, if I’ve now found the right viewpoint from which to see things, if war in the Frankish army is all like this, then this is really what I dreamt of. But one can never be quite sure of things...”

“What d’you expect to be sure of?” interrupted Torrismund. “Insignia, ranks, titles ... All mere show. Those paladins’ shields with armorial bearings and mottoes are not made of iron; they’re just paper, you can put your finger through them.”

They had reached a well. On the stone verge frogs were leaping and croaking. Torrismund turned towards the camp and pointed at the high pennants above the palisades with a gesture as if wanting to blot it all out.

“But the Imperial army,” objected Raimbaut, his outburst of bitterness suffocated by the other’s frenzy of negation, and trying not to lose his sense of proportion and to find a place again for his own sorrows, “the Imperial army, one must admit, is still fighting for a holy cause and defending Christianity against the Infidel."

“There’s no defense or offense about it, or sense in anything at all,” said Torrismund. “The war will last for centuries, and nobody will win or lose; we’ll all sit here face to face forever. Without one or the other there’d be nothing, and yet both we and they have forgotten by now why we’re fighting ... D’you hear those frogs? What we are all doing lias as much sense and order as their croaks, their leaps from water to bank and from bank to water ...”

“To me it’s not like that,” said Raimbaut, “to me, in fact, everything is too pigeonholed, too regulated ... I see the virtue and value, but it’s all so cold ... But a knight who doesn’t exist, that does rather frighten me, I must confess ... Yet I admire him, he’s so perfect in all he does, he makes one more confident than if he did exist, and almost”—he blushed—“I can sympathise with Bradamante ... Agilulf is surely the best knight in our army ...”

“Puah!”

“What d’you mean, puah!”

“He’s a made-up job, worse than the others!”

“What d’you mean, a made-up job? All he does he takes seriously.”

“Nonsense! All tales ... Neither he exists nor the things he does nor what he says, nothing, nothing at all...”

“How, then, with the disadvantage he is at compared to others, can he do in the army the job he does? By his name alone?”

Torrismund stood a moment in silence, then said slowly, “Here the names are false too. If I could I’d blow the lot up. There wouldn’t even be earth on which to rest the feet”

“Is there nothing salvageable, then?”

“Maybe. But not here.”

“Who? Where?”

“The knights of the Holy Grail.”

“And where are they?”

“In the forests of Scotland.”

“Have you seen them?”

“No!”

“Then how d’you know about them?”

“I know.”

They were silent. Only the croak of frogs could be heard. Raimbaut began to feel a fear coming over him that this croaking might drown everything else, drown him too in a green slimy blind pulsation of gills. But he remembered Bradamante, how she had appeared in battle with raised sword, and all his unease was forgotten. He longed for a time to fight and do prodigious deeds before her emerald eyes.





7


EACH nun is given her own penance here in the convent, her own way of gaining eternal salvation. Mine is this of writing tales. And a hard penance it is. Outside is high summer; from the valley rises a murmur of voices and a movement of water. My cell is high up and through its slit of a window I can see a bend of the river with naked peasant youths bathing, and further on, beyond a clump of willows, girls too have taken off their dresses and are going down to bathe. Now one of the youths has swum underwater and surfaced to look at them and they are pointing at him with cries. I might be there too, in gay company, with young folk of my own station, and servants and retainers. But our holy vocation leads us to esteem the permanent above the fleeting joys of the world. Which remains ... and if this book, and all our acts of piety carried out with ashen hearts, are not already ashes too ... even more ashes than the sensual frolics down at the river which tremble with life and propagate like circles in water...

One starts off writing with a certain zest, bHt a time comes when the pen merely grates in dusty ink, and not a drop of life Hows, and life is all outside, outside the window, outside oneself, and it seems that never more can one escape into a page one is writing, open out another world, leap the gap. Maybe it’s better so. Maybe the time when one wrote with delight was neither a miracle nor grace but a sin, of idolatry, of pride. Am I rid of such now? No, writing has not changed me for the better at all. I have merely used up part of my restless, conscienceless youth. What value to me will these discontented pages be? The book, the vow, are worth no more than one is worth oneself. One can never be sure of saving one’s soul by writing. One may go on writing with a soul already lost.

Then do you think I ought to go to the Mother Abbess and beg her to change my task, send me to draw water from the well, thread flax, shell chickpeas? There’d be no point in that. I’ll go on with my scribe’s duties as best I can. My next job is to describe the paladins’ banquet.

Against all Imperial rules of etiquette, Charlemagne settled at table before the proper time, when no one else had reached the board. Down he sat and began to pick at bread or cheese or olives or peppers, everything on the tables in fact. Not only that, but he also used his hands. Absolute power often slackens all controls, generates arbitrary actions, even in the most temperate of sovereigns.

One by one the paladins arrived in their grand gala robes which, between lace and brocade, still showed chain mail cuirasses, the kind with a very wide mesh, worn with dress armor, gleaming like a mirror but splintering at a mere rapier’s blow. First came Roland, who sat down on his uncle the emperor’s right, and then Rinaldo of Montalbano, Astolf, Anjouline of Bayonne, Richard of Normandy and all the others.

At the very end of the table sat Agilulf, still in his stainless battle armor. What had he come to do at table, he who had not and never would have any appetite, nor stomach to fill, nor mouth to bring his fork to, nor palate to sprinkle with Bordeaux wine? Yet he never failed to appear at these banquets, which lasted for hours, though the time would surely have been better employed in operations connected with his duties. But no! He had the right like all the others to a place at the Imperial table, and he occupied it. And he carried out the banquet ceremonial with the same meticulous care that he put into every other ceremonial act of the day.

The courses were the usual ones in a military mess: stuffed turkey roasted on the spit, braised oxen, suckling pig, eels, gold fish. Scarcely had the lackeys offered the platters than the paladins flung themselves on them, rummaged about with their hands and tore the food apart, smearing their cuirasses and squirting sauce everywhere. The confusion was worse than battle—soup tureens overturning, roast chickens flying, and lackeys yanking away platters before a greedy paladin emptied them into his porringer.

At the corner of the table where Agilulf sat, on the other hand, all proceeded cleanly, calmly and orderly. But he who ate nothing needed more attendance by servers than the whole of the rest of the table. First of all—while there was such a confusion of dirty plates everywhere that there was no chance of changing them between courses and each ate as best he could, even on the tablecloth—Agilulf went on asking to have put in front of him fresh crockery and cutlery, plates big and small, porringers, glasses of every size and shape, innumerable forks and spoons and knives that had to be well sharpened. So exigent was he about cleanliness that a shadow on a glass or plate was enough for him to send it back. He served himself a little of everything. Not a single dish did he let pass. For example, he peeled off a slice of roast boar, put meat on one plate, sauce on another, smaller, plate, then with a very sharp knife chopped the meat into tiny cubes, which one by one he passed on to yet another plate, where he flavored them with sauce, until they were soaked in it. Those with sauce he then put in a new dish and every now and again called a lackey to take away the last plate and bring him a new one. Thus he busied himself for half hours at a time. Not to mention chickens, pheasants, thrushes—at these he worked for whole hours without ever touching them except with the points of little knives, which he asked for specially and which he very often had changed in order to strip the last little bone of its finest and most recalcitrant shred of flesh. He also had wine served, and continuously poured and repoured it among the many beakers and glasses in front of him; and the goblets in which he mingled one wine with the other he every now and again handed to a lackey to take away and change for a new one. He used a great deal of bread, constantly crushing it into tiny round pellets, all of the same size, which he arranged on the tablecloth in neat rows. The crust he pared down into crumbs, and with them made little pyramids. Eventually he would get tired of them and order the lackeys to brush down the table. Then he started all over again.

With all this he never lost the thread of talk weaving to and fro across the table, and always intervened in time.

What do paladins talk of at dinner? They boast as usual.

Said Roland, “I must tell you that the battle of Aspramonte was going badly before I challenged King Agolante to a duel and bore off Excalibur. So attached to it was he that when I cut off his right arm at a blow, his fist remained tight around its hilt and I had to use pliers to detach ’em.”

Said Agilulf, “I do not wish to contradict, but in the interests of accuracy I must record that Excalibur was surrendered by our enemies in accordance with the armistice treaties five days after the battle of Aspramonte. It figures in fact in a list of light weapons handed over to the Frankish army, among the conditions of the treaty.”

Exclaimed Rinaldo, “Anyway that’s nothing compared with my sword Fusberts. When I met that dragon, passing over the Pyrenees I cut him in two with one blow and, d’you know that a dragon’s skin is harder than a diamond?”

Interrupted Agilulf, “One moment, let’s just get this clear. The passage of the Pyrenees took place in April, and in April, as everyone knows, dragons slough their skins and are soft and tender as newborn babes.”

The paladins said, “Well, yes, that day or another, if not there it was somewhere else, that’s what happened, there’s no point in splitting hairs...”

But they were annoyed. This Agilulf always remembered everything, cited chapter and verse even for a feat of arms accepted by all and piously described by those who had never seen it, tried to reduce it to a normal incident of service to be mentioned in a routine evening’s report to a Regimental Commander. Since the world began there has always been a difference between what actually happens in war and what is told afterwards, but it matters little if certain events actually happen or not in a warrior's life. His person, his power, his bearing guarantee that if things did not happen just like that in every petty detail, they might have and still could do so on a similar occasion. But someone like Agilulf has nothing to sustain his own actions, whether true or false. Either they are set down day by day in verbal reports and taken down in registers, or there's emptiness, blankness. He wanted to reduce his colleagues to sponges of Bordeaux wine, full of boasts, of projects winging into the past without ever having been in the present, of legends attributed to different people and eventually hitched to a suitable protagonist.

Every now and again someone would call Charlemagne in testimony. But the emperor had been in so many wars that he always got confused between one and another and did not really even remember which he was fighting now. His job was to wage war, and at most think of what would come after. Past wars were neither here nor there to him. Everyone knew that tales by chroniclers and bards were to be taken with a grain of salt. The emperor could not be expected to rectify them all. Only when some matter came up with repercussions on military organization, on ranks, for instance, or attribution of titles of nobility or estates, did the king give an opinion. An opinion of a sort, of course; in such matters Charlemagne’s wishes counted for little. He had to stick to the issues at hand, judge by such proofs as were given and see that laws and customs were respected. So when asked his opinion he would shrug his shoulders, keep to generalties, and sometimes get out of it with some such quip as, “Oh! Who knows? War is war, as they say!” Now on this Sir Agilulf of the Guildivern, who kept crumbling bread and contradicting all the feats which—even if not told in versions accurate in every detail—were genuine glories of Frankish arms, Charlemagne felt like setting some heavy task, but he had been told that the knight treated the most tiresome duties as tests of zeal so there was no point in it.

“I don’t see why you must niggle so Agilulf,” said Oliver. “The glory of our feats tends to amplify in the popular memory, thus proving it to be genuine glory, basis of the titles and ranks we have won.”

“Not of mine,” rebutted Agilulf. “Every title and predicate of mine I got for deeds well asserted and supported by incontrovertible documentary evidence!”

“So you say!” cried a voice.

“Who spoke will answer to me!” said Agilulf, rising to his feet.

“Calm down, now, be good,” said the others. “You who are always picking at others’ feats, must expect someone to say a word about yours...”

“I offend no one. I limit myself to detailing facts, with place, date and proofs!”

“It was I who spoke. I will detail too.” A young warrior had got up, pale in the face.

“I'd like to see what you can find contestable in my past, Torrismund,” said Agilulf to the youth, who was in fact Torrismund of Cornwall. “Would you deny, for instance, that I was granted my knighthood because, exactly fifteen years ago, I saved from rape by two brigands the King of Scotland’s virgin daughter, Sophronia?”

“Yes, I do contest that Fifteen years ago Sophronia, the King of Scotland’s daughter, was no virgin.”

A bustle went the whole length of the table. The code of chivalry then holding prescribed that whoever saved from certain danger the virginity of a damsel of noble lineage was immediately dubbed knight. But saving from rape a noblewoman no longer a virgin only brought a mention in despatches and three month’s double pay.

“How can you sustain that, which is an affront not only to my dignity as knight but to the lady whom I took under the protection of my sword?”

“I do sustain it.”

“Your proof?”

“Sophronia is my mother.”

A cry of surprise rose from all the paladins’ chests. Was young Torrismund, then, no son of the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall?

“Yes, Sophronia bore me twenty years ago, when she was thirteen years of age,” explained Torrismund. “Here is the medal of the royal house of Scotland,” and rummaging in his breast he took out a seal on a golden chain.

Charlemagne, who till then had kept his face and beard bent over a dish of river prawns, judged that the moment had come to raise his eyes. “Young knight” said he, giving his voice the major Imperial authority, “do you realise the gravity of your words?”

"Fully,” said Torrismund, "for me even more than for others.”

There was silence all round. Torrismund was denying a connection to the Duke of Cornwall which bore with it the title of knight. By declaring himself a bastard, even of a princess of blood royal, he risked dismissal from the army.

But much more serious was Agilulf's position. Before battling for Sophronia when she was attacked by bandits, and saving her virtue; he had been a simple nameless warrior in white armor wandering round the world at a venture; or rather (as was soon known) empty white armor, with no warrior inside. His deed in defense of Sophronia had given him the right to be an armed knight The knighthood of Selimpia Citeriore being vacant just then, he had assumed that title. His entry into service, all ranks and titles added later, were a consequence of that episode. If Sophronia's virginity which he had saved was proved nonexistent, then his knighthood went up in smoke too, and nothing that he had done afterwards could be recognized as valid at all, and his names and titles would be annulled, so that each of his attributions would become as nonexistent as his person.

“When still a child, my mother became pregnant with me,” narrated Torrismund, “and fearing the ire of her parents when they knew her state, fled from the royal castle of Scotland and wandered throughout the highlands. She gave birth to me in the open air, on a heath, and while wandering over fields and woods of England raised me till I was five. Those first memories are of the loveliest period of my life, interrupted by this intruder. I remember the day. My mother had left me to guard our cave, while she went off as usual to rob fruit from the orchards. She met two roving brigands who wanted to abuse her. They might have made friends in the end, who knows, for my mother often lamented her solitude. Then along came this empty armor in search of glory and routed the brigands. Recognizing my mother as of royal blood, he took her under his protection and brought her to the nearest castle, that of Cornwall, where he consigned her to the duke and duchess. Meanwhile I had remained in the cave hungry and alone. As soon as my mother could she confessed to the duke and duchess the existence of her son whom she had been forced to abandon. Servants bearing torches were sent out to search for me and I was brought to the castle. To save the honor of the royal family of Scotland, linked to that of Cornwall by bonds of kinship, I was adopted and recognized as son of the duke and duchess. My life was tedious and burdened with restriction as the lives of cadets of noble houses always are. No longer was I allowed to see my mother, who took the veil in a distant convent. This mountain of falsehood has weighed me down and distorted the natural course of my life. Now finally I have succeeded in telling the truth. Whatever happens to me now must be better than the past."

At table meanwhile the pudding had been served, a sponge in various delicately colored layers, but such was the general amazement at this series of revelations that not a fork was raised towards speechless mouths.

“And you, what have you to say about this story?” Charlemagne asked Agilulf. All noted that he had not said, “Knight.”

“Lies. Sophronia was a virgin. On the flower of her purity repose my honor and my name.”

“Can you prove it?”

“I will search out Sophronia.”

“Do you expect to find her the same fifteen years later?” said Astolfo maliciously. “Breastplates of beaten iron have lasted less.”

“She took the veil immediately after I had consigned her to that pious family.”

“In fifteen years, in times like these, no convent in Christendom has been saved from dispersal and sack, and every nun has had time to de-nun and re-nun herself at least four or five times over.”

“Anyway, violated chastity presupposes a violator. I will find him and obtain proof from him of the date when Sophronia could be considered a virgin.”

“I give you permission to leave this instant, should you so desire,” said the emperor. “I feel that nothing at this moment can be closer to your heart than the right to wear a name and arms now contested. If what this young man says is true I cannot keep you in my service. In fact I can take no account of you, even to make good arrears of pay,” and here Charlemagne could not prevent giving a touch of passing satisfaction to his little speech as if to say, “At last we’ve found a way of getting rid of this bore!”

The white armor now leant forward, and never till that moment had it shown itself so empty. The voice issuing from it was scarcely audible. “Yes, my Emperor, I will go.”

“And you?” Charlemagne turned to Torrismund. “Do you realize that by declaring yourself born out of wedlock you cannot bear the rank due to your birth? Do you at least know who was your father? And have you any hope of his recognizing you?”

“I can never be recognized...”

“One never knows. Every man, when growing older, tends to make out a balance sheet of his whole life. I too have recognized all my children by concubines, and there were many, some certainly not mine at all.”

“My father was no man.”

“And who was he? Beelzebub?”

“No, sire,” said Torrismund calmly.

“Who then?”

Torrismund moved to the middle of the hall, put a knee to the ground, raised his eyes to the sky and said, “ ’Tis the Sacred Order of the Knights of the Holy Grail!”

A murmur rustled over the banqueting table. One or two of the paladins crossed themselves.

“My mother was a bold lass,” explained Torrismund, “and always ran into the deepest woods around the castle. One day in the thick of the forest she met the Knights of the Holy Grail, encamped there to fortify their spirit in isolation from the world. The child began playing with those warriors and from that day she went to their camp every time she could elude family surveillance. But in a short time she returned pregnant from those childish games.”

Charlemagne remained in thought a moment, then said, “The Knights of the Holy Grail have all made a vow of chastity and none of them can ever recognize you as a son.”

“Nor would I wish them to,” said Torrismund. “My mother has never spoken of any knight in particular, but brought me up to respect as a father the Sacred Order as a whole.”

“Then,” added Charlemagne, “the Order as a whole is not bound by any vow of the kind. Nothing therefore prevents it from being recognized as a person’s father. If you succeed in finding the Knights of the Holy Grail and get them to recognize you as son of the whole Order collectively, then your military rights, in view of the Order’s prerogatives, would be no different from those you had as scion of a noble house.”

“I go,” said Torrismund.

It was an evening of departure, that night, in the Frankish camp. Agilulf prepared his baggage and horse meticulously, and his squire Gurduloo rolled up in knapsacks blankets, currycombs, caldrons, which made such a heap they prevented his seeing where he was riding. He took the opposite direction to his master and galloped off, losing everything on the way.

No one had come to greet Agilulf as he left, except a few poor ostlers and blacksmiths who did not make too many distinctions and realized this officer might be fussier but was also unhappier than others. The paladins did not come, with the excuse that they did not know the time of his departure and anyway there was no reason to. Agilulf had not said a word to any of them since coming from the banquet. His departure aroused no comment. When his duties were distributed in such a way that none remained unaccounted for, the absence of the nonexistent knight was thought best left in silence by general consent.

The ony one to be moved, indeed overwhelmed, was Bradamante. She hurried to her tent. “Quick!” she called to her maids and retainers, “Quick!” and flung into the air clothes, armor, lances and omaments, “Quick!” doing this not as usual when undressing or angry, but to have all put in order, make an inventory and leave. “Prepare everything, I'm leaving, leaving, not staying here another minute; he’s gone. The only one who made any sense in this whole army, the only one who can give any sense to my life and my war, and now there’s nothing left but a bunch of louts and nincompoops including myself, and life is just a constant rolling between bed and battle. He alone knew the secret geometry, the order, the rule, by which to understand its beginning and end!” So saying, she put on her country armor piece by piece, and over it her periwinkle robe. Soon she was in the saddle, male in all except the proud way certain true women have of looking virile, spurred her horse to the gallop, dragging down palisades and tents and sausage stalls, and soon vanished into a high cloud of dust.

That dust was seen by Raimbaut as he ran about on foot looking for her, crying, “Where are you going, oh, where Bradamante. Here am I for you, for you, and you go away!” with a lover’s stubborn indignation which means, “I’m here, girl, loaded with love, how can you not want it, what can a girl want that she doesn’t take me, doesn’t love me, what can she want more than what I feel I can and ought to give?” So he rages, incapable of accepting rejection; at a certain moment love for her becomes love of himself, love of himself is love for her and for what could be for them both and is not. And in his frenzy Raimbaut ran into his tent, prepared horse, arms and knapsack, and left too. For war can be well fought where there’s a glimpse of a woman’s mouth between lance points. Nothing—wounds, dust, the stink of a horse—means anything but that smile.

Torrismund also left that evening, sad and hopeful too. He wanted to find the wood again, the damp dark wood of his infancy, his mother, his days in that cave, and even more, the pure comradeship of his fathers, armed and watching around a hidden bivouac fire, robed in white, silent in the thick of a forest, with low branches almost touching bracken and mushrooms sprouting from rich earth which never saw sun.

Charlemagne, as he rose from the banquet, rather shaky on his legs, heard of all these sudden departures and moved towards the royal pavilion thinking of days when the departures were of Astolf, Rinaldo, Guidon Selvaggio, Roland, to do deeds which later entered the epics of poets, while now the same veterans would never move a step unless forced by duty. “Let them go, they’re young, let them get on with it,” said Charlemagne, with the habit, usual to men of action, of considering movement always good, but already with the bitterness of the old who suffer at losing things of the past more than they enjoy greeting those of the future.





8


BOOK, evening is here, and I have begun to write more rapidly. No sound now rises from the river but the rumble of the cascade; bats fly mutely by the window, a dog bays, voices ring from the haystacks. Maybe this penance of mine has not been so ill chosen by the Mother Abbess. Every now and again I notice my pen beginning to hurry over the paper as if by itself, with my hurrying along after it. 'Tis towards the truth we hurry, my pen and I, the truth which I am constantly expecting to meet deep in a white page, and which I can reach only when my pen strokes have succeeded in burying all the disgust and dissatisfaction and rancor which I am forced here in seclusion to expiate.

Then at a mere scamper of a mouse (the convent attics are full of them), or a sudden gust of wind banging the shutter (always apt to distract me, and I hurry to reopen it), or at the end of some episode in this tale and the start of another, or maybe just at the repetition of a line, my pen is heavy as a cross once again and my race towards truth wavers in its course.

Now I must show the lands crossed by Agilulf and his squire on their journey. I must set it all down on this page, a dusty main road, a river, a bridge, and Agilulf passing on his light-hooved horse, toc-toc toc-toc, for this knight without a body weighs little, and the horse can do many a mile without tiring and its master is quite untirable. Next a heavy gallop passes over the bridge: tututum! It’s Gurduloo clutching the neck of his horse, their two heads so close it’s impossible to tell if the horse is thinking with the squire’s head or the squire with the horse’s. On my paper I trace a straight line with occasional curves, and this is Agilulf's route. This other line all twirls and zigzags is Gurduloo’s. When he sees a butterfly flutter by, Gurduloo at once urges his horse after it, thinking himself astride not the horse but the butterfly, and so wanders off the road and into the fields. Meanwhile Agilulf goes straight ahead, following his course. Every now and again Gurduloo’s route off the road coincides with invisible short cuts (or maybe the horse is following a path of its own choice, with no guidance from its rider) and after many a twist and turn the vagabond finds himself again beside his master on the main road.

Here on the river’s bank I will set a mill. Agilulf stops to ask the way. The miller woman replies courteously and offers wine and bread, which he refuses. He accepts only fodder for the horse. The road is dusty and sun-swept. The good millers are amazed at the knight’s not being thirsty.

When he has just left, up gallops Gurduloo, with the sound of a regiment at full tilt. “Have you seen my master?”

“And who may your master be?”

“A knight ... no, a horse...”

“Are you in a horse's service then?”

“No ... it’s my horse that’s in a horse’s service...”

“Who’s riding that horse?”

“Eh ... no one knows ...”

“Who is riding your own horse, then?”

“Oh, ask it!”

“Don’t you want any food or drink either?”

“Yes, yes! Eat! Drink!” and he gulps it all down.

Now I am drawing a town girt with walls. Agilulf has to pass through it. The guards at the gate ask him to show his face. They have orders to let no one pass with closed visor, lest he be a ferocious brigand infesting the local countryside. Agilulf refuses, comes to blows with the guard, forces his passage, escapes.

Beyond the town I now trace out a wood. Agilulf scours it through and through until he finds the dreadful bandit. He disarms him, chains him up, and drags him before the guards who had refused him passage. “Here is the man you so much feared!”

“Ah blessings on you, white knight! But tell us who you are, and why you keep your helmet shut?”

“My name is at my journey’s end,” says Agilulf, and flees.

Around the town goes a rumor that he is an archangel or soul from purgatory. “The horse moved so lightly,” says one, “there might have been no one in the saddle at all.”

Here by the edge of the wood passes another road also leading to the town. Along this road is riding Bradamante. To those in the town shé says, “I am looking for a knight in white armor. I know him to be here.”

“No. No, he’s not,” is the reply.

“If he’s not, then it must be him.”

“Go and find where he is, then. He’s rushed away from here.”

“Have you really seen him? White armor which seems to have a man inside?”

“Who’s inside if not a man?”

“One who is more than all other men!”

“There’s devil’s work in this,” says an old man, “and in you too. O knight of the gentle voice!”

Away spurs Brandamante.

A little later, Raimbaut reins his horse in the town square. “Have you seen a knight pass?”

“Which? Two have passed and you’re the third.” “One rushing after the other.”

“Is it true one isn’t a man?”

“The second is a woman.”

“And the first?”

“Nothing.”

“What about you?”

“Me? I’m ... I’m a man.”

“Thanks be to God!”

Agilulf was riding along, followed by Gurduloo. A damsel ran onto the road, with flowing hair and tattered dress, and flung herself on her knees. Agilulf stopped his horse. “Help, noble cavalier,” she invoked. “Half a mile from here a flock of wild bears is besieging the castle of my lady, the noble widow Priscilla. Only a few helpless women inhabit the castle. Nobody can get in or out. I was dropped by a rope from the battlements and escaped the claws of those beasts by a miracle. O knight, come and free us, do!”

“My sword is always at the service of widows and helpless creatures,” said Agilulf. “Gurduloo, take on your crupper this damsel who will guide us to the castle of her mistress.”

They began climbing a rocky path. The squire was not even looking at the way as he rode; the breast of the woman sitting in his arms showed pink and plump through the tears in her dress, and Gurduloo felt lost.

The damsel turned to look at Agilulf. “What a noble bearing your master has!” she said.

“Uh, uh,” replied Gurduloo, reaching out a hand towards that warm breast.

“He’s so sure and proud in every word and gesture ...” said she, still with eyes on Agilulf.

“Uh,” exclaimed Gurduloo as, his rein slung on his wrist, he tried with both hands to ascertain how a creature could be so steady and soft at the same time.

“And his voice,” said she, “so sharp and metallic...”

From Gurduloo’s mouth came only a faint whine, for he had buried it between the young woman’s neck and shoulder and was lost in their scent.

“How happy my mistress will be to find herself freed from the bears by such a man ... Oh I do envy her ... But hey, we’re going off the track! What is it, squire, are you distracted?”

At a turn in the path was a hermit holding out a hand for alms. Agilulf, who gave to every beggar he met the regular sum of three centimes, drew in his horse and rummaged in his purse.

“Blessings on you, knight,” said the hermit pocketing the money, and signing for him to bend down so as to speak in his ear, “I will reward you at once by telling you to beware of the widow Priscilla! This tale of the bears is all a trap. She herself raises them, so as to be freed by the most valiant knights passing on the road below and draw them up to the castle to feed her insatiable lust.”

“It may be as you say, brother,” replied Agilulf, “but I am a knight and it would be discourteous to reject a formal request for help made by a female in tears.”

“Are you not afraid of the flames of lust?”

Agilulf was slightly embarrassed. “Well, we’ll see...”

“Do you know what remains of a knight after a sojourn in that castle?”

“What?”

“You see it before your eyes. I too was a knight. I too saved Priscilla from the bears, and now here I am!” And he really was in rather bad shape.

“I will take note of your experience, brother, but I affront the trial,” and Agilulf spurred away and up to Gurduloo and the girl.

“I don’t know what these hermits always find to gossip about,” said the girl to the knight. “No group of religious or lay folk chatter so much and so maliciously.”

“Are there many hermits round here?”

“It’s full of ’em. And new ones are constantly being added.”

“I will not be one of those,” exclaimed Agilulf. ‘Let’s hurry!”

“I hear the snarl of bears,” exclaimed the girl. “I’m afraid! Let me get down and hide behind that bush!”

Agilulf came out onto the open space before the castle. Everything was black with bears. At the sight of horse and knight they bared their teeth and lined up side by side to bar his way. Agilulf set his lance and charged. One or two he pierced, others he stunned, others he bruised. Gurduloo came riding up and chased them with a kitchen spit. In ten minutes those not stretched on the ground like so many carpets had gone to hide in the forest depths.

The castle gate opened. “Noble knight, can hospitality repay what I owe you?” On the threshold had appeared Priscilla, surrounded by her ladies and maids. Among these was the young woman who had accompanied the pair till then. Inexplicably, she was already home and no longer dressed in rags but a nice clean apron.

Agilulf, followed by Gurduloo, made his entry into the castle. The widow Priscilla was not tall and not short, not plump but well contained, with a bosom not large but well in view, and sparkling black eyes, in fact a woman with something to say for herself. There she stood, before Agilulf’s white armor, looking pleased. The knight was grave but reserved.

“Sir Agilulf Emo Bertrandin of the Guildivern,” said Priscilla, “I know your name already and know who you are and who you are not."

At this announcement Agilulf, as if freed from a discomfort, put aside his shyness and looked more at ease. Even so he bowed, dropped on one knee, and said, "At your service,” then jumped to his feet with a start.

“I have heard you much spoken of,” said Priscilla, "and it has been for long my ardent wish to meet you. What miracle has brought you along this remote road?”

“I am travelling,” said Agilulf, “to trace, before it be too late, a virginity of fifteen years ago.”

“Never have I heard a knightly enterprise with so fleeting an aim,” said Priscilla. “But as fifteen years have passed I have no scruples in retarding you another night, and requesting you to be a guest in my castle,” and off she moved beside him.

The other women all stood there with eyes fixed on him until he vanished with the chatelaine into a series of withdrawing chambers. Then they turned to Gurduloo.

“Aha, what a fine figure of a squire,” they cried, clapping their hands. He stood there like an ape, scratching himself. “A pity he has so many fleas and stinks so,” they said. “Quick, let’s wash him!” They bore him to their quarters and stripped him naked.

Priscilla had led Agilulf to a table laid for two. “I know your habitual temperance, knight,” said she, “but how else can I begin to do you honor but by inviting you to sit at my board? Certainly,” she added slyly, “the signs of gratitude which I intend to offer do not stop there!”

Agilulf thanked her, sat down facing the chatelaine, broke a few pieces of bread in his fingers, and after a moment or two of silence, cleared his voice and began to converse fluently.

“How truly strarige and eventful, lady, are the adventures which befall a knight errant. These can be grouped under various headings. First...” And so he conversed, affably, clearly, informatively, at times arousing a suspicion of overmeticulousness, soon banished by the volubility with which he went on to other subjects, interlarding serious phrases with jests in excellent taste, expressing about matters and persons opinions neither too favorable nor too contrary, and always such as to offer his partner opportunities to voice her own opinions, and encouraging her with gracious questions.

“Oh, what delicious talk is this!” exclaimed Priscilla, beaming.

Then just as suddenly as he had begun talking Agilulf went silent.

“Let the singing begin,” cried Priscilla, and clapped her hands. Lute girls entered the chamber. One intoned the song which starts, “ 'Tis the unicorn gathers the rose”; then another, “Jasmin, veulliez embellir le beau coussin.”

Agilulf had words of appreciation for both music and voices.

Now a cluster of maidens entered dancing. They wore tight robes and had garlands in their hair. Agilulf accompanied their dance by banging his iron gloves on the table in rhythm.

No less festive were the dances taking place in another wing of the castle, in the quarters of the maidens in waiting. Half clothed, the young women were playing at ball and drawing Gurduloo into the game. The squire, dressed in a short tunic which the ladies had lent him, never kept to his place or waited for the ball to be thrown but ran after it and tried to grasp it in any way he could, flinging himself headlong at one or another damsel, then amid his struggles being often struck by another inspiration and rolling with the girl on one of the soft cushions scattered around.

“Oh, what are you doing? Oh no, no, you great big camell Oh, see what he's doing to me! No, I want to play ball. Ah! ah! ah!"

Gurduloo was quite beside himself now. What with the warm bath they had given him, the scents and all that pink and white flesh, his only desire now was to merge into the general fragrance.

“Oh oh, here again. Oh, my God! Oh really, aah ...!”

The others went on playing ball as if noticing nothing, jesting, laughing and singing. “Oho! Ohi! The moon does fly on high ...”

The girl whom Gurduloo had whisked away, after a long last cry, returned to her companions rather flushed, rather stunned, then laughing and clapping her hands cried, “Over here, here to me!” and began to play again.

Before long Gurduloo was rolling on another girl.

“Come on, come on, oh what a bore, oh what a thruster, no, you’re hurting...” and she succumbed.

Other women and maidens not participating in the game were sitting on benches and chattering away...“Since Philomena, you know, was jealous of Clara, but...” then one would suddenly feel herself seized round the waist by Gurduloo...“Oh, what a fright!...well, as I was saying, William seems to have gone with Euphemia ... where are you taking me?” Gurduloo had loaded her onto a shoulder...“D’you understand? Meanwhile that other silly with her usual jealousy...” The girl was continuing to chatter and gesticulate as, dangling on Gurduloo’s shoulder, she vanished.

Not long after, back she came, rather dishevelled, a shoulder strap tom which she settled back, still gabbing away, “Well, as I was saying, Philomena made such a scene with Clara, and the other, on the other hand...”

In the banqueting chamber dancers and songsters had withdrawn. Agilulf was giving the chatelaine a long list of compositions often played by the Emperor Charlemagne’s musicians.

“The sky darkens,” observed Priscilla.

“ ’Tis night deep night” admitted Agilulf.

“The room which I have reserved for you...”

“Thanks. Listen to the nightingale out there in the park.”

“The room which I have reserved for you ... is my own...”

“Your hospitality is exquisite...'Tis from that oak the nightingale sings. Let us draw close to the window.”

He got up, offered her his iron arm, moved to the window. The gurgle of nightingales was a cue for him to launch out on a series of poetic and mythological references.

But Priscilla cut this off short. “What the nightingale sings about is love. And we...”

“Ah love!” cried Agilulf with such a brusque change of tone that Priscilla was alarmed. Then, without a break, he plunged into a dissertation of the passion of love. Priscilla was tenderly excited. Leaning on his arm, she urged him towards a room dominated by a big four-poster bed.

“Among the ancients, as love was considered a god...” Agilulf was pouring out.

Priscilla closed the door with a double bolt, went up to him, bowed her head on his armor and said, “I’m a little cold, the fire is spent...”

“The opinion of the ancients,” said Agilulf, “as to whether it be better to make love in cold rooms rather than in hot is a controversial one. But the advice of most...”

“Oh, you do know all about love,” whispered Priscilla.

“The advice of most is against stiflingly hot rooms and in favor of a certain natural warmth.”

“Shall I call my maidens, to light the fire?”

“I will light it myself.” He examined the wood in the fireplace, praised the flame of this or that type of wood, enumerated the various ways of lighting fires in the open or in enclosed places. A sigh from Priscilla interrupted him. As if realizing that this new subject was dispersing the amorous atmosphere being created, Agilulf quickly began smattering his speech with references and allusions and comparisons to warmth of emotions and senses.

Priscilla, smiling now, with half-closed eyes, stretching out a hand towards the flames which were beginning to crackle, said, “How lovely and warm ... how sweet it would be to be warm between sheets, prone...”

The mention of bed suggested a series of new observations to Agilulf; according to him the difficult art of bed making was unknown to the serving maids of France, and in nobles’ palaces could be found only ill-stretched sheets.

“Oh no, do tell me, my bed too ...?” asked the widow.

“Certainly yours is a queen’s bed, superior to all others in the Imperial dominions, but my desire to see you surrounded only with things worthy of you in every detail makes me eye that fold there with some apprehension...”

“Oh, a fold!” cried Priscilla, also swept by the passion for perfection communicated to her by Agilulf.

They undid the bed, finding and deploring little folds and puckers, portions too stretched or too loose, and this search gave moments of stabbing anguish and others of ascent to ever higher skies.

Having upset the whole bed as far as the mattress, Agilulf began to remake it according to the rules. This was an elaborate operation. Nothing was to be left to chance, and secret expedients were put to work. All this with diffuse explanations to the widow. But every now and again something left him dissatisfied, and he would begin all over again.

From the other wings of the castle rang a cry, or rather a moan or bray, forced out unwillingly.

“What's that?” started Priscilla.

“Nothing, it’s my squire’s voice,” said he.

With that shout mingled others more acute, like strident sighs soaring to the sky.

“What’s that now?” asked Agilulf.

"Oh, just the girls,” said Priscilla. ‘Playing ... youth, you know.”

And they went on remaking the bed, listening every now and again to the sounds of the night.

“Gurduloo’s shouting ...”

“What a noise those girls do make ...”

“The nightingale.”

“The cicadas...”

The bed was now ready, puckerless. Agilulf turned towards the widow. She was naked. Her robes had fallen chastely to the floor.

“Naked ladies are advised,” declared Agilulf, “that the most sublime of sensual emotions is embracing a warrior in full armor.”

“You don’t need to teach me that!” exclaimed Priscilla. “I wasn’t born yesterday!” So saying, she took a leap and clamped herself to Agilulf, entwining her legs and arms around his armor.

One after the other she tried all the ways in which armor can be embraced, then, all langor, entered the bed.

Agilulf knelt down beside her pillow. “Your hair,” he said.

Priscilla when disrobing had not undone the high array of her brown mane of hair. Agilulf began illustrating the place of loose hair in the transport of the senses. “Let’s try.”

With firm delicate movements of his iron hands he loosened her castle of tresses and made her hair fall down over her breast and shoulders.

“But,” he added, “it is certainly more subtle for a man to prefer a woman whose body is naked but hair elaborately dressed, even covered with veils and diadems.”

“Shall we try again?”

“I will dress your hair myself.” He dressed it and showed his capacity at weaving tresses, winding and twisting them round and fixing them with big pins. Then he made an elaborate arrangement of veils and jewels. So an hour passed, but Priscilla, on his handing her the mirror, had never seen herself so lovely.

She invited him to lie down by her side. “They say,” said he, “that every night Cleopatra dreamt she had an armed warrior in her bed.”

“I’ve never tried,” she confessed, “they usually take it off beforehand.”

“Well, try now.” And slowly, without soiling the sheets, he entered the bed fully armed from head to foot and stretched out taut as if on a tomb.

“Don’t you even loosen the sword from its scabbard?”

“Amorous passion knows no half measures.”

Priscilla shut her eyes in ecstasy.

Agilulf raised himself on an elbow. “The fire is smoking. I will get up to see why the flue does not draw.”

The moon was just showing at the window. On his way back from fireplace to bed Agilulf paused. “Lady, let us go out onto the battlements and enjoy this late moonlit eve.”

He wrapped her in his cloak. Entwined, they climbed the tower. The moon silvered the forest. A homed owl sang. Some windows of the castle were still alight and from them every now and again came cries or laughs or groans or a bray from the squire.

“All nature is love ...”

They returned to the room. The fire was almost out. They crouched down to puff on the embers. Now that they were close to each other, with Priscilla’s pink knee grazing his metallic greave, a new, more innocent intimacy grew.

When Priscilla went to bed again the window was already touched by first light. “Nothing disfigures a woman’s face like the first ray of dawn,” said Agilulf. But to get her face to appear in the best light he had to move bed, posts and all.

“How do I look?” asked the widow.

“Most lovely.”

Priscilla was happy. But the sun was rising fast and to follow its rays Agilulf continually had to move the bed.

“’Tis dawn,” said he. His voice had already changed. “My duty as knight requires me to set out on my road at this hour.”

“Already!” moaned Priscilla.

“I regret, gentle lady, but ’tis a graver duty urges me.”

“Oh how lovely it was...”

Agilulf bent his knee. “Bless me, Priscilla.” He rose, called his squire. He had to wander all over the castle before he finally spied him, exhausted, asleep like a log in a kind of dog kennel. “Quick, saddle up!” but he had to carry Gurduloo himself. The sun in its continuing ascent outlined the two figures on horseback against golden leaves in the woods—the squire balanced like a sack, the knight straight, pollarded like the slim shadow of a poplar.

Maidens and servant maids had hurried around Priscilla.

“How was it, mistress, how was it?”

“Oh, if you only knew! What a man, what a man...”

“But do tell, do describe, how was it? Tell us.”

“A man ... a man ... a knight ... a continuous ... a paradise...”

“But what did he do? What did he do?”

“How can one tell that? Oh, lovely, how lovely it was...”

“But has he got everything? Yet ... Do tell ...”

“I simply wouldn’t know now ... So much ... But what about you, with that squire...?”

“Oh, nothing, no, did you? No, you? I really forget...”

“What? I could hear you, my dears...”

“Oh well, poor boy, I don’t remember, I don't remember either, may you ... what, me? Mistress, do tell us about him, about the knight, eh? What was Agilulf like?”

“Oh, Agilulf!”





9


AS I write this book, following a tale told in an ancient almost illegible chronicle, I realise only now that I have filled page after page and am still at the very beginning. For now the real ramifications of the plot get under way: Agilulf and his squire’s intrepid journey for proof of Sophronia’s virginity, interwoven with Bradamante’s pursuit and flight, Raimbaut’s love, and Torrismund’s search for the Knights of the Grail. But this thread, instead of running swiftly through my fingers, is apt to sag or stick and when I think of all the journeys and obstacles and flights and deceits and duels and jousts that I still have to put on paper I feel rather dazed. How this discipline as convent scribe and my assiduous penance of seeking words and all my meditations on ultimate truths have changed me. What the vulgar—and I too till now—considered as the greatest of delights, the interweaving adventures which make up every knightly tale, now seem to me pointless decoration, mere fringe, the hardest part of my task.

I long to hurry on with my story, tell it quickly, embellish every page with enough duels and battles for a poem but when I pause and start rereading I realise that my pen has left no mark on the paper and the pages are blank.

To tell it as I would like, this blank page would have to bristle with reddish rocks, flake with pebbly sand, spout sparse juniper trees. In the midst of a twisting ill-marked track, I would set Agilulf, passing erect on his saddle, lance at rest. But this page would have to be not only a rocky slope but the dome of sky above, slung so low that there is room only for a flight of cawing rooks in between. With my pen I should also trace faint dents in the paper to represent the slither of an invisible snake through grass or a hare crossing a heath, suddenly coming into the clear, stopping, sniffing around through its short whiskers, then vanishing again.

Everything moves on this bare page with no sign, no change on its surface, as after all everything moves and nothing changes on the earth’s crinkly crust; for there is but one single expanse of the same material, as there is with the sheet on which I write, an expanse which in spite of contractions and congealings in different forms and consistencies and various subtle colorings can still seem smeared over a flat surface. And even when hairy or feathery or knobbly bits seem at various times to move, that is but the change between the relations of various qualities distributed over the expanse of uniform matter, without anything changing in fact. The only person who can be said definitely to be on the move is Agilulf, by which I do not mean his horse or armor, but that lonely self-preoccupied, impatient something jogging along on horseback inside the armor. Around him pine cones fall from branches, streams gurgle over pebbles, fish swim in streams, maggots gnaw at leaves, tortoises rub their hard bellies on the ground, but all this is mere illusion of movement, perpetual revolving to and fro like waves. And in this wave Gurduloo is revolving to and fro, prisoner of the world’s stuff, he too smeared like the pine cones, fish, maggots, stones and leaves, a mere excrescence on the earth’s crust.

How much more difficult it is for me to plot on my paper Bradamante’s course or Raimbaut’s or glum Torrismund’s! There would have to be some very faint pucker on the surface as can be got by pricking paper from below with a pin, and this pucker would always have to be impregnated with the general matter of the world and this itself constitute its sense and beauty and sorrow, its true attrition and movement.

But how can I get on with my tale, if I begin to torture the white page like this, scoop out valleys and clefts in it score it with creases and scratches, reading into it the paladin’s progress? To help tell my tale it would be better if I drew a map, the gentle countryside of France, and proud Brittany, and the English Channel surging with black billows, and high Scotland up there and harsh Pyrenees down here, and Spain still in Infidel hands, and Africa mother of serpents. Then with arrows and crosses and numbers I could plot the journey of one or other of our heroes. Here, for instance, with a rapid line in spite of a few twists I can make Agilulf land in England and direct him towards the convent where Sophronia has lived, retired, for fifteen years.

He arrives, and finds the convent a mass of ruins.

“You come too late, noble knight,” said an old man. “These valleys still resound with the cries of those poor women. A short while ago a fleet of Moorish pirates landed on this coast and sacked the convent, bore off the nuns as slaves and set fire to the walls.”

“Bore off, where to?”

“As slaves to be sold in Morocco, m’lord.”

“Was there among those nuns one Sophronia, who in the world was the King of Scotland’s daughter?”

“Ah, you mean Sister Palmyral There was indeed! They loaded her up on their shoulders straight away, the rascals! Though no longer a girl she was still attractive. I remember as if it were now, her shouts and groans at those ugly faces.”

“Were you present at the sack?”

“Well, we who live here, you know, are always out on the green.”

“And you didn’t help?”

“Help who? Well m’lord, you know, so suddenly ... we had no orders, or experience ... Between doing a thing and doing it badly we thought it best to do nothing at all.”

‘Tell me, did this Sophronia lead a pious life in the convent?”

“These days there are nuns of all kinds, but Sister Palmyra was the holiest and most chaste in the entire diocese.”

“Quick, Gurduloo, down to the port we go and embark for Morocco.”

All this part I am now scoring with wavy lines is the sea, or rather the ocean. Now I draw the ship on which Agilulf makes his journey, and further on I draw an enormous whale, with an ornamental scroll and the words “Ocean Sea.” This arrow indicates the ship's route. I do another arrow showing the whale's course: there, they met So at this point of the ocean will take place an encounter between whale and ship, and as I’ve drawn the whale in bigger, the ship will get the worst of it Now I’m drawing in a crisscross of arrows to show that at this point there was a savage battle between whale and ship. Agilulf fights peerlessly and plunges his lance into the creature’s side. Over him squirts a nauseating jet of whale oil, which I show by these divergent lines. Gurduloo leaps onto the whale and forgets all about the ship, which at a whisk from the whale’s tail overturns. Agilulf with his iron armor of course sinks like a stone. Before the waves entirely submerge him he cries to his squire, “We’ll meet in Morocco! I’m walking there!”

In fact, after dropping mile after mile into the depths, Agilulf lands on his feet on the sand at the bottom of the sea and begins walking briskly. Often he meets marine monsters and defends himself against them with his sword. The only bother about armor at the bottom of the sea is rust But having been squirted from head to foot in whale oil, the white armor has a layer of grease which keeps it intact.

On the ocean I now draw a turtle. Gurduloo has gulped down a pint of salty water before realising that the sea is not supposed to be inside him but he inside the sea. Eventually he seizes the shell of a big sea turtle. Partly letting himself be drawn along, partly guiding it by pinches and prods, he and the turtle near the coast of Africa. Here they become entangled in the nets of some Moorish fishermen.

When the nets are drawn on board the fishermen see amid a wriggling school of mullet a man in soaking wet clothes covered with seaweed. “The merman! The merman!” they cry.

“Merman? Nonsense! It’s Gudi-Ussuf,” cries the head fisherman. “It’s Gudi-Ussuf, I know him!”

Gudi-Ussuf was in fact one of the names by which Gurduloo was known in the Moslem field kitchens, when unsuspectingly he crossed the lines and found himself in the Sultan’s camp. The head fisherman had been a trooper in the Moorish army in Spain, so knowing Gurduloo to have a strong body and docile mind, he took him on as an oyster fisher.

One evening the fishermen, and Gurduloo among them, were sitting on the rocky Moroccan shore opening the oysters they’d fished one by one, when from the water appeared a helmet, a breastplate, and then a complete suit of armor walking step by step up the beach. “A lobster man! A lobster man!” cried the fishermen—running away in terror to hide among the rocks.

“A lobster man! Nonsense!” said Gurduloo. “It's my master! You must be exhausted, sir, after walking all that way!”

“I’m not the least tired," replied Agilulf. “And you? What are you doing here?”

“Finding pearls for the Sultan,” intervened the ex-soldier, “as he has to give a new pearl to a different wife every night.”

Having three hundred and sixty-five wives, the Sultan visited one a night, so every wife was only visited once a year. To the one visited it was his custom to give a pearl, so that every day merchants had to supply him with a fresh new pearl. As that day the merchants had exhausted their supplies, they had recourse to the fishermen to procure a pearl at all costs.

“You who’ve managed to walk so well on the sea bottom,” the ex-soldier said to Agilulf, “why don’t you join our enterprise?”

“Knights do not join enterprises with lucre as their aim, particularly if conducted by enemies of his religion. I thank you, O Pagan, for having saved and fed this squire of mine, but I don’t care a jot if your Sultan cannot present a pearl to this three hundred and sixty-fifth wife tonight”

“We care a lot, though, as we shall all be whipped,” exclaimed the fisherman. “Tonight is no ordinary wife’s night It’s the turn of a new one, whom the Sultan is visiting for the first time. She was bought almost a year ago from certain pirates, and has awaited her turn till now. Tis improper that the Sultan should present himself to her with empty hands, particularly as she is a coreligionist of yours, Sophronia of Scotland, of royal blood, brought to Morocco- as a slave and immediately destined for our sovereign’s harem.”

Agilulf did not betray his emotion. “I will show you how to get out of your difficulty,” said he. “Let the merchants suggest that the Sultan bring his new wife not the usual pearl but a present to soothe her homesickness: the complete armor of a Christian warrior.”

“Where can we find such armor?”

“Mine!” said Agilulf.

Sophronia was awaiting nightfall in her quarters of the palace harem. From the grating of the cusped window she looked out over garden palms, fountains, alleys. The sun was setting, the muezzin launching his cry, and in the garden the scented flowers of dusk were opening.

A knock. 'Tis time! No, the usual eunuchs. They are bearing a present from the Sultan. A suit of armor. Of white armor. What can it mean? Sophronia, alone again, remains at the window. She has been there for almost a year. When bought as a wife she had been assigned the place of a wife recently repudiated, a place which would fall due again more than eleven months later. Living in the harem doing nothing, one day after the other, was even more boring than life in the convent had been.

“Do not fear, noble Sophronia,” said a voice behind her. She turned. It was the armor talking. “I am Agilulf of the Guildivern who saved your immaculate virtue once before.”

“Help!” screamed the Sultan’s wife. Then, recomposing herself, “Ah yes, I thought I knew that white armor. It was you who arrived just in time, years ago, to prevent me from being abused by a brigand...”

“Now I arrive just in time to save you from the horror of pagan nuptials.”

“Oh yes ... Always you ... you are...”

“Now, protected by this sword, I will accompany you forth from the Sultan’s domains.”

“Yes ... indeed ... of course.”

When the eunuchs came to announce the Sultan’s arrival they were put to the sword one by one. Wrapped in a cloak, Sophronia ran through the gardens by the knight’s side. The dragomen gave the alarm. But their heavy scimitars could do little against the agile sword of the warrior in white armor. And his shield sustained well the assault of a whole picket’s lances. Gurduloo was waiting behind a cactus tree with horses. In the port a felucca was ready to leave for Christian lands. From the prow Sophronia watched the palms of the beach drawing further away.

Now I am drawing the felucca here in the sea. I’m doing a rather bigger one than the ship before, so that if it does meet a whale there'll be no disaster. With this curved line I mark the passage of the felucca which I want to reach the port of St. Malo. The trouble is that here in the Bay of Biscay there’s such a mess of crisscrossing lines already that it’s better to let the felucca pass a little further out, over here, yes, over there; then what should it go and do but hit the Breton rocks! It’s wrecked, sinks, and Agilulf and Gurduloo just manage to bear Sophronia in safety to the shore.

Sophronia is weary. Agilulf decides to put her for refuge in a cave and then together with his squire go to Charlemagne’s camp and announce her virginity to be still intact and so also the legitimacy of his name. Now I’m marking the cave with a small cross at this point of the Breton coast so as to be able to find it again later. I can’t think what this line is doing passing the same place; by now my paper is such a mess of lines going in all directions. Ah yes, here’s a line corresponding to Torrismund’s journey. So the thought-laden youth is passing right here, while Sophronia lies in the cave. He too approaches the cave, enters, sees her.





10


HOW had Torrismund got there? While Agilulf was moving from France to England, England to Africa, and Africa to Brittany, the putative cadet of the House of Cornwall had wandered far and wide over forests of Christian lands in search of the secret camp of the Knights of the Holy Grail. As the Holy Order has a habit of changing its headquarters from year to year, and never makes a show of its presence to the profane, Torrismund could find no indications to follow in his journey. He wandered about at random, chasing a remote sensation which was the same for him as the name of the Grail. But was it the order of the pious Knights he was searching for, or the memory of his childhood on Scottish heaths? Sometimes the sudden opening of a valley black with larches, or a cleft of grey rocks at the end of which boomed a torrent white with spray, filled him with an inexplicable emotion which he took for a warning. "Perhaps they’re here, nearby.” And if from nearby rose the faint and distant sound of a hunting horn then Torrismund lost all doubts, and began searching every crevice yard by yard for trace of them. But at most he would run into some lost huntsman or shepherd with his flock.

On reaching the remote land of Koowalden, he stopped in a village and asked the local rustics to be so good as to give him some goat’s cheese and black bread.

“Willingly would we give you some, sir,” said a goatherd, “but see how I, my wife and children are reduced to skeletons! We have to make so many offerings to the knights! This wood is crawling with colleagues of yours, though differently dressed. There’s a whole troop of ’em, and for supplies, you know, they all come down on us!”

“Knights living in the wood? How are they dressed?”

“In white cloaks and golden helmets with two white swans’ wings on the sides.”

“Are they very holy?”

“Oh, yes they’re holy enough. And they certainly never soil their hands with money, as they haven’t a cent. But they expect a lot and we have to obey. Now we’re stripped clean, and there’s a famine. What shall we give them when they come next time?”

But the young man was already hurrying towards the wood.

Amid the fields, on the calm waters of a brook, slowly passed a flock of swans. Torrismund followed them along the bank. From among the bushes resounded an arpeggio, “Flin, flin, flin!” The youth walked on and the sound seemed at times to be following him and at others preceding him, “Flin, flin, flin!” Where the bushes thinned out appeared a human figure. It was a warrior in a helmet decorated with white wings, carrying both a lance and a small harp on which now and again he struck that chord, "Flin, flin, flin!” He said nothing. His eyes did not avoid Torrismund but passed over him as if not perceiving him, although they seemed to be following him. When tree trunks and branches separated them, the warrior led Torrismund onto the right track by calling with one of his arpeggios, “Flin, flin, flin!” Torrismund longed to talk to him, ask him questions, but instead followed, silent and intimidated.

They came into a clearing. On every side were warriors armed with lances, in golden cuirasses, wrapped in long white cloaks, motionless, each turned in a different direction with his eyes staring into a void. One was feeding a swan with grains of com, his eyes turned elsewhere. At a new arpeggio from the player, a warrior on horseback answered by raising his horn and sending out a long call. When he was silent all the warriors moved; each made a few steps in his direction and stopped again.

"Knights...” Torrismund plucked up courage to say, “excuse me, I may be mistaken, but are you not the Knights of the Grai—”

"Never pronounce the name!” interrupted a voice behind him. A knight with white hair had halted near him. “Is it not enough for you to come disturbing our holy recollection?”

"Oh do forgive me.” The youth turned to him. “I’m so happy to be among you! If you knew how long I’ve looked for you!”

“Why?”

“Why...?” and his longing to proclaim his secret was stronger than his fear of committing sacrilege. “Because I’m your son!”

The old knight remained impassive. “Here neither fathers nor sons are acknowledged,” said he after a moment of silence. “Whoever enters the Sacred Order leaves behind him all earthly relationships.”

Torrismund felt more disappointed than repudiated. He would have preferred an angry reply from his chaste fathers, which he could have contradicted or argued with by giving proofs and invoking their common blood, but this calm reply, which did not deny the possibility of the facts but excluded all discussion on a matter of principle, was discouraging.

“My sole other aspiration is to be recognized as a son of the Sacred Order,” he tried to insist, “for which I bear a limitless admiration.”

“If you admire our Order so much,” said the old man, “you should have one sole aspiration, to be admitted as part of it”

“Would that be possible, d’you think?” exclaimed Torrismund, immediately attracted by the new pospect.

“When you have made yourself worthy.”

“What must one do?”

“Purify oneself gradually from every passion and let oneself be possessed by love of the Grail.”

“Oh, you do pronounce that name then?”

“We knights can; you profane, no.”

“But tell me, why are all here silent and you the only one to talk?”

“I am charged with the duty of relations with the profane. Words being often impure, the Knights prefer to abstain from them, and also to let the Grail speak through their lips.”

“Tell me what must I do to begin?”

“D’you see that maple leaf? A drop of dew has formed on it. Try and stand quite still and stare at the drop on that leaf, identify yourself with it, forget all the world in that drop, until you feel you have lost yourself and are pervaded by the infinite strength of the Grail.”

And he left him. Torrismund stared fixedly at the drop, stared and stared, began thinking of his own affairs, saw a frog jumping on the leaf, stared and stared at the frog, and then at the drop again, moved a foot which had gone numb, and then suddenly felt bored. In the woods knights appeared and disappeared, moving very slowly, their mouths open and eyes staring, accompanied by swans whose soft plumage they caressed every now and again. One suddenly threw wide his arms and with a hoarse cry broke into a little run.

“That one over there,” Torrismund could not prevent himself from asking the old man, who had reappeared nearby, “what’s up with him?”

“Ecstasy!” said the old man. “That is something you will never know, who are so distracted and curious. Those brothers have finally reached complete communion with the all.”

“And what about those?” asked the youth. Some knights were swaying about as if taken by slight shivers, and yawning.

“They’re still at an intermediate stage. Before feeling one with the sun and stars the novice feels as if he has the nearest objects within himself, very intensely. This has an effect, particularly on the youngest. Those brothers of ours whom you see are feeling a pleasant gentle tickle from the running brook, the rustling leaves, the mushrooms growing underground.”

“And don’t they tire of it in the long run?”

“Gradually they reach the higher states in which the nearest vibrations no longer occupy them but the great sweep of the skies, and very slowly they detach themselves from the senses.”

“Does that happen to all?”

“To few. And completely, only to one of us, the Elect, the King of the Grail.”

They had reached a glade where a large number of knights were exercising their arms before a canopied tribunal. Under that canopy was sitting or rather crouching, motionless, someone who seemed to be more mummy than man, dressed too in the uniform of the Grail, but more sumptuously. His eyes were open, indeed staring, in a face dried up as a chestnut.

“Is he alive?” asked the youth.

“He’s alive, but now he’s so rapt by love of the Grail that he no longer needs to eat or move or do his daily needs, or scarcely to breathe. He neither feels nor sees. No one knows his thoughts; they certainly reflect the movements of distant planets.”

“But why do they make him preside over military parades, if he doesn’t see?”

“’Tis a rite of the Grail.”

The knights were fencing among themselves. They were moving their swords in jerks, looking into the void, and taking sharp sudden steps as if they could never foresee what they would do a second later. And yet they never missed a blow.

“How can they fight with that air of being half asleep?”

“ ’Tis the Grail in us moving our swords. Love of the universe can take the form of great frenzy and urge us lovingly to pierce our enemies. Our Order is invincible in war just because we fight without making any effort or choice but letting the sacred frenzy flow through our bodies.”

“And does it always turn out all right?”

“‘Yes, with whoever has lost all residues of human will and only lets the Grail direct his slightest gesture.”

“Slightest gesture? Even now when you’re walking?”

The old man was walking like a somnambulist. “Certainly. It’s not I who am moving my feet. I am letting them be moved. Try. ’Tis the start of all.”

Torrismund tried, but first he just could not succeed, and secondly he did not enjoy it There were the woods, green and leafy, all fluttering and achirp, where he longed to run and let himself go and put up game, to pit himself, his strength, his effort, his courage against that shadow, that mystery, that extraneous nature. Instead of which he had to stand there swaying like a paralytic.

“Let yourself be possessed,” the old man was warning him, “let yourself be possessed entirely.”

“But really, you know,” burst out Torrismund, “what I long for is to possess, not be possessed.” The old man crossed his elbows over his face so as to stop up eyes and ears. “You still have a long way to go, my boy.”

Torrismund remained in the encampment of the Grail. He tried hard to leam and imitate his fathers or brothers (he didn’t know which to call them), tried to suffocate every motion of the mind which seemed too individual, to fuse himself in communion with the infinite love of the Grail, attentive for any indication of those ineffable sensations which sent the knights into ecstasies. But days passed and his purification made no progress. Everything they most liked bored him utterly: those voices, that music, their constant aptness to vibrate. And above all the continual proximity of the brethren, dressed like that, half naked, with golden breastplates and helmets, and very white flesh, some old, others fussy, touchy youths, all became more and more antipathetic to him. With their story about the Grail always moving them, they indulged in all sorts of loose habits while pretending to be ever pure.

The thought that he could have been generated like that, by people with eyes staring into the void without even thinking of what they were doing, forgetting right away, he found quite unbearable.

The day came for handing over tribute. All the villagers around the wood, in carefully arranged order, were to hand over to the Knights of the Grail a certain number of goats’ cheeses, baskets of carrots, sacks of millet and young lambs.

A delegation of peasants advanced. “We wish to put forward the fact that the year has been a very bad one over the whole land of Koowalden. We are at our wits’ end even to feed our children. Famine touches rich and poor. Pious Knights, we have come humbly to ask you to forgo our tribute just this time.”

The King of the Grail, under the canopy, sat silent and still as ever. But at a certain moment; slowly, he unjoined his hands, which he had crossed over his stomach, raised them to the sky (he had very long nails), and from his mouth came, “Iiiih...”

At that sound all the Knights advanced with set lances towards the poor peasants. “Help! Let’s defend ourselves!” they cried. “We’ll hurry off and arm ourselves with axes and pitchforks!” and they dispersed.

The Knights, their eyes turned to the sky, marched to the sound of horns and timbrels. From hop rows and bushes leapt villagers armed with pitchforks and billhooks, trying to contest their passage. But they could do little against the Knights’ inexorable lances. Breaking their scattered defenses, the knights flung their heavy chargers against the huts of stone and straw and mud, grinding them under hooves, deaf to the shout of women, calves, children. Other Knights bore lit torches and set fire to roofs, haystacks, stalls and a few poor granaries, until the villages were reduced to crackling bonfires.

Torrismund, in the wake of the Knights, was horrified.

“Why, tell me, why?” he cried to the old man, keeping behind him as the only one who could listen to him. “So it’s not true you are pervaded by love of all! Hey, be careful, you’re running down that old woman! How have you the hearts to attack these poor folk? Help, the flames are licking that cradle! What're you doing?”

“Do not scrutinize the designs of the Grail, novice!” warned the old man. “We are here but for this: ’tis the Grail moving us! Abandon yourself to its burning love.”

But Torrismund had dismounted, rushed to the help of a mother and gave her back a fallen baby.

“No! Don’t take my crop! I’ve worked so hard for it!” yelled an old man.

Torrismund was beside him. “Drop that sack, you brigand!” and he rushed at a Knight and tore the bag from him.

“Blessings on you! Stay with us!” cried some of the poor wretches, trying with pitchforks and knives to defend themselves behind a wall.

“Get into a semicircle, and we’ll attack 'em together,” shouted Torrismund at them, and so put himself at the head of the local militia.

Now he ejected the Knights from the houses. At one moment he found himself face to face with the old Knight and another two armed with torches. “He’s a traitor, take him!”

A fierce struggle rose. The locals used spits, and their women and children stones. Suddenly a horn sounded “Retreat!” Before the peasant counterattack the Knights had fallen back at many points and were now clearing out of the village.

The group pressing Torrismund hard retired too. “Away brothers!” shouted the old man. “Let us be led where the Grail takes us.”

“The Grail will triumph,” chorused the others, turning their bridles.

“Hurrah! You’ve saved us!” The peasants crowded round Torrismund. “You’re a knight, but you're generous! At last one who is! Stay with us! Tell us what you want; we’ll give it to you.”

“Well ... what I want ... Now I don’t know,” stuttered Torrismund.

“We knew nothing either, even if we were human, before this battle.... And now we seem to be able ... to want ... to need to do things ... however difficult...” and they turned to mourn their dead.

“I can’t stay with you ... I don't know who I am ... Farewell!” and away he galloped.

“Come back!” cried the peasants, but Torrismund was already far from the village, from the wood of the Grail, from Koowalden.

Again he began his wandering among nations. Till now he had despised every honor and pleasure, his sole ideal being the Sacred Order of the Knights of the Grail. And now that ideal had vanished. To what aim could he set his disquiet?

He fed on wild fruit in the woods, on bean soup in monasteries he found on the way, on shellfish along rocky coasts. And on the shores of Brittany, seeking for shellfish in a cave, what should he find but a sleeping woman.

The restlessness which had moved him over the world, to places of soft velvety vegetation swept by low searing wind, into tense sunless days, now, at the sight of those long black lashes lowered over full pale cheeks, and that tender relaxed body, and the hand on the full-formed bosom, the soft loose hair, the lip, the hip, the toe, the breath, finally seemed assuaged.

He was leaning over her, looking, when Sophronia opened her eyes. “You’ll do me no harm,” she said gently, “what do you seek for amid these deserted rocks?”

“I seek something which I have always lacked and only now that I see you do I know what it is. How did you reach this shore?”

“Though a nun, I was forced to many a follower of Mohammed but the nuptials were never consummated as I was the three hundred and sixty-fifth wife and Christian arms intervened. Because I was a victim of ferocious pirates and was forced to abandon ship, I was brought here.”

“I understand. And are you alone?”

“My deliverer has gone to the Imperial camp to make certain arrangements, as far as I understand.”

“I yearn to offer the protection of my sword, but fear that the emotion firing me at sight of you may turn to suggestions which you might not consider honest.”

“Oh, have no scruples, you know, I’ve seen so much. Though every time, just at the very moment, arrives that deliverer, always the same one.”

“Will he arrive this time too?”

“Oh well, one never knows.”

“What is your name?”

“Azira or Sister Palmyra according to whether I’m in a Sultan’s harem or a convent.”

“Azira, I seem always to have loved you ... already to have lost myself in you...”





11


CHARLEMAGNE was prancing along towards the coast of Brittany. “We’ll soon see, we’ll soon see, Agilulf of the Guildivern, calm yourself. If what you tell me is true, if this woman still bears the same virginity as she had fifteen years ago, then there’s no more to be said, and you have been an armed knight by full right, and that young man was just trying to deceive us. To make certain I have brought along in our suite an old woman who’s an expert in such matters. We soldiers haven’t quite got the touch for these things, eh ...”

The old midwife, on the crupper of Gurduloo’s saddle, was twittering away, “Yes, yes, Majesty, I’ll be most careful, even if it’s twins...” She was deaf and had not yet understood what it was all about.

Into the grotto first went two officers of the suite, bearing torches. They returned in some confusion. “Sire, the virgin is lying in the embrace of a young soldier.”

The lovers were brought before the emperor.

“You, Sophronia!” cried Agilulf.

Charlemagne had the young man’s face raised. “Torrismund!”

Torrismund started towards Sophronia. “Are you Sophronia? Ah, my own mother!”

“Do you know this young man, Sophronia?” asked the emperor.

The woman bent her head, pale-faced, “If it’s Torrismund, I brought him up myself,” said she in a faint voice.

Torrismund leapt into his saddle. “I’ve committed foul incest! Never will you see me more!” He spurred and galloped off into the woods to the right.

Agilulf spurred off in his turn. “Nor will you see me again!” said he. “I have no longer a name! Farewell!” And he rode off deep into the woods on the left.

All remained in consternation. Sophronia hid her head between her hands.

Suddenly came a thud of hooves from the right. It was Torrismund galloping back out of the wood at full tilt. He shouted, “Hey! She was a virgin until a short time ago! Why didn’t I think of that at once? She was a virgin! She can’t be my mother!”

“Would you explain?” asked Charlemagne.

“In truth, Torrismund is not my son, but my brother or rather half-brother,” said Sophronia. “Our mother the Queen of Scotland—my father the King having been at the wars for a year—bore him after a chance encounter, it seems, with the Sacred Order of the Knights of the Grail. When the king announced his return, that perfidious woman (as am I forced to consider our mother) with the excuse of my taking my little brother for a walk, let us loose in the woods. And she arranged a foul deceit for her husband on his arrival. She said that I, then aged thirteen, had run away to bear a little bastard. Held back by ill-conceived respect, I never betrayed our mother’s secret. I lived on the heaths with my infant halfbrother, and they were free and happy years for me, compared with those awaiting me in the convent which I was forced to enter by the Duke of Cornwall. Never until this morning at the age of thirty-three have I known man, and my first experience turns out to be incestuous...”

“Let’s think it all over calmly,” said Charlemagne, conciliatingly. “It is incest, of course, but that between half-brother and sister is not the most serious.”

“’Tis not incest; Sacred Majesty! Rejoice, Sophronia!” exclaimed Torrismund, radiant “In my researches on my origin I learnt a secret which I wished to keep forever. She whom I thought my mother, that is you, Sophronia, was not born of the Queen of Scotland but is the King’s natural daughter by a farmer’s wife. The King had you adopted by his wife, that is, by her who I now learn from you was my mother and your stepmother. Now I understand how she, obliged by the king to pretend herself your mother against her wish, longed for a chance to be rid of you and she did so by attributing to you the result of a passing adventure of her own, myself. You are the daughter of the King of Scotland and of a peasant woman, I of the Queen and of the Sacred Order; we have no blood tie, only the link of love forged freely here a short time ago and which I ardently hope you will be willing to reforge.”

“All seems to be working out for the best...” said Charlemagne, rubbing his hands. “Let us hasten to trace our fine knight Agilulf and reassure him that his name and title are no longer in danger.”

“I will go myself, Majesty!” cried a knight, running forward. It was Raimbaut.

He entered the woods, shouting, “Knight! Sir Agilulf! Knight of the Guildivern,...Agilulf Emo Bertrandin of the Guildivern and of the Others of Corbentraz and Sura, Knight of Selimpia Citeriore and Feeeez!...All’s in oooorder!...Come baaack!”

Only the echo replied.

Raimbaut began to search the woods track by track, and off the tracks over crags and torrents, calling, ears stretched, seeking a sign, a trace. He saw the marks of horse’s hooves. At a certain point they were stamped deeper, as if the animal had stopped. From there on the trail of hooves grew lighter, as if the horse had been let loose. But at the same point diverged another trail, a trail of iron footsteps. Raimbaut followed that.

On reaching a clearing he held his breath. At the foot of an oak tree, scattered over the ground, were an overturned helmet with a crest of iridescent plumes, a white breastplate, greaves, arm pieces, basinet, gauntlets, in fact all the pieces of Agilulf's armor, some disposed as if in an attempt at an ordered pyramid, others rolled haphazardly on the ground. On the hilt of the sword was a note, “I leave this armor to Sir Raimbaut of Roussillon.” Beneath was a half squiggle, as of a signature begun and interrupted.

“Knight!” called Raimbaut, turning towards the helmet, the breastplate, the oak tree, the sky. “Knight! Take back your armor! Your rank in the army and the nobility of France is assured!” and he tried to put the armor together, to stand it on its feet, continuing to shout, “You’re all set, sir, no one can deny it now!” No voice replied. The armor would not stand. The helmet rolled on the ground. “Knight, you have resisted so long by your will power alone, and succeeded in doing all things as if you existed, why suddenly surrender?” But he did not know in which direction to turn; the armor was empty, not empty like before, but empty of that something going by the name of Sir Agilulf which was now dissolved like a drop in the sea.

Raimbaut then unstrapped his own armor, stripped, put on the white armor, donned Agilulf’s helmet, grasped his shield and sword, leapt on his horse. Thus accouterd he appeared before the emperor and his retinue.

“Ah, Agilulf, so you’re back, are you, and all’s settled, eh?”

But another voice replied from the helmet. “I’m not Agilulf, Majesty!” The visor was raised and Raimbaut’s face appeared. “All that remains of the Knight of the Guildivern is his white armor and this paper assigning me its possession. Now my one longing is to fling myself into battle!”

The trumpets sounded the alarm. A fleet of feluccas had just landed a Saracen host in Brittany. The Frankish army hurried to arms. “Your desire is granted!” cried Charlemagne. “Now is the hour of battle. Do honor to the arms you bear! Although Agilulf had a difficult character, he was a fine soldier.”

The Frankish army held the invaders at bay, opened a breach in the Saracen ranks through which young Raimbaut was the first to rush. He lay about him, giving blows and taking them. Many a Moor bit the dust. On Raimbaut’s lance were spitted as many as it could take. Already the invading hordes were falling back on their moored feluccas. Hard pressed by Frankish arms, the defeated invaders took off from shore, except those who remained to soak the grey Breton soil with Moorish blood.

Raimbaut issued from battle victorious and untouched, but his armor, Agilulf’s impeccable white armor, was now all encrusted with earth, bespattered with enemy blood, covered with dents, scratches and slashes, the helmet askew, the shield gashed in the very midst of that mysterious coat of arms. Now the youth felt it to be truly his own armor, his, Raimbaut of Roussillon’s. His first discomfort on donning it was gone; now it fitted him like a glove.

He was galloping, all alone, on the edge of a hill. A voice rang from the bottom of the valley, “Hey, up there! Agilulf!”

A knight was coursing towards him, in armor covered with a mantle of periwinkle blue. It was Bradamante following him. “At last I’ve found you, white knight!”

“Bradamante, I'm not Agilulf, I'm Raimbaut!” he was on the point of calling in reply, but thought it better to say so from nearby, and turned his horse to reach her.

“At last 'tis you coursing to meet me, oh unseizable warrior!” exclaimed Bradamante. “Oh, that it should be granted me to see you rushing so after me, you the only man whose actions are not mere impulse, shallow caprice, like those of the usual rabble who follow me!” And so saying, she wheeled her horse and tried to escape him, though turning her head every now and again to see if he were playing her game and following her.

Raimbaut was impatient to say to her, “Don’t you notice how I too move awkwardly, how my every gesture betrays desire, dissatisfaction, disquiet? All I wish is to be one who knows what he wants!” And to tell her so he galloped after her, as she laughed and called, “This is the day I’ve always dreamt of!”

He lost sight of her. There was a grassy solitary vale. Her horse was tied to a mulberry tree. It was like that first time he had followed her when still not suspecting her to be a woman. Raimbaut dismounted. There she was, lying down on a mossy slope. She had taken off her armor, was dressed in a short topaz-colored tunic. As she lay there she opened her arms to him. Raimbaut went forward in his white armor. This was the moment to say, “I'm not Agilulf. The armor with which you fell in love is now filled out with the weight of a body, a young agile one like mine. Don’t you see how this armor has lost its inhuman whiteness and become a covering for battle, which is exposed to every blow, a tool, patient and useful?” This was what he wanted to say, instead of which he stood there with trembling hands, taking hesitant steps towards her. Perhaps the best thing would be to show himself, to take off his armor, make it clear that he is Raimbaut, particularly now as she closes her eyes and lies there with a smile of expectation. Tensely the young man tore off his armor; now Bradamante would open her eyes and recognize him ... No; she had put a hand over her face as if not wanting to be disturbed by the sight of the nonexistent knight’s invisible approach, and Raimbaut flung himself on her.

“Yes, I was sure of it!” exclaimed Bradamante, with closed eyes. “I was always sure it would be possible!” and she hugged him close, and in a fever of which both partook, they were united. “Yes, oh yes, I was sure of it!”

Now it’s over and the moment comes to look each other in the eyes.

“She’ll see me,” Raimbaut thinks in a flash of pride and hope. “She’ll understand all. She’ll understand it’s been right and fine and love me for ever!”

Bradamante opens her eyes.

“You!”

She leaps from her couch, pushes Raimbaut back.

“You! You!” she cries, her mouth enraged, her eyes starting with tears. “You! Impostor!”

And on foot she brandishes her sword, raises it against Raimbaut and hits him, but with the flat, on his head, stuns him, and all he can bring out as he raises unarmed hands to defend himself or embrace her is, “But, but ... tell me ... wasn’t it good...?” Then he loses his senses and hears only vaguely the clatter of her departing horse.

If a lover is wretched who invokes kisses of which he knows not the flavor, a thousand times more wretched is he who has had a taste of the flavor and then had it denied him. Raimbaut continued his intrepid warrior’s life. Wherever the fight was thickest, there his lance cleft. If in the turmoil of swords he spied a glint of periwinkle blue, he would rush towards it. “Bradamante!” he would shout, but always in vain.

The only person to whom he wanted to confess his troubles had vanished. Sometimes, in his wandering around the bivouacs, the way some armor stood erect on its side pieces made him quiver, for it reminded him of Agilulf. Suppose the Knight had not dissolved but found some other armor? Raimbaut would go up and say, “Don’t think me offensive, colleague, but would you mind raising the visor of your helmet?”

Every time he hoped to find himself facing an emptiness, instead of which there was always a nose above a pair of twisted moustaches. “I’m sorry,” he would murmur, and turn away.

Another was also searching for Agilulf: Gurduloo, who every time he saw an empty pot; cauldron or tub would stop and exclaim, “Oh sor master! At your orders, sor master.”

Sitting in a field on the verge of a road, he was making a long speech into the mouth of a wine flask when a voice interrupted him, “What are you seeking inside there, Gurduloo?”

It was Torrismund, who, having celebrated his solemn nuptials with Sophronia in the presence of Charlemagne, was riding off with his bride and a rich suite to Koowalden, of which the emperor had named him Count.

“It’s my master I’m looking for,” says Gurduloo.

“In that flask?”

“My master is a person who doesn’t exist, so he can not exist as much in a flask as in a suit of armor.”

“But your master has dissolved into thin air!”

“Then am I squire to the air?”

“You will be my squire, if you follow me.”

They reached Koowalden. The country was unrecognizable. Instead of villages now rose towns and houses of stone, and mills, and canals.

“I have returned, good folk, to stay among you...”

“Hurrah! Fine! Hurrah! Long live the bride!”

“Wait and show your joy at the news I bring you. The Emperor Charlemagne—bow to his sacred name—has invested me with the title of Count of Koowalden.”

“Ah ... But ... Charlemagne?...Well...”

“Don’t you understand? You have a Count now! I will defend you against the incursions of the Knights of the Grail.”

“Oh we’ve thrust all those out of the whole of Koowalden some time ago! You see, we've always obeyed for so long ... But now we’ve seen one can live quite well without having truck with either knights or counts ... We cultivate the land, have put up artisan shops and mills, and try to get our laws respected by ourselves, to defend our borders, in fact we’re moving ahead and not complaining. You’re a generous young man and we’ll not forget what you’ve done for us ... Stay here if you wish ... but as equals...”

“As equals? You don’t want me as Count? But don’t you understand it’s the emperor’s order? It’s impossible for you to refuse!”

“Oh, people are always saying that! Impossible!...To get rid of those Grail people seemed impossible ... and then we only had pitchforks and billhooks ... We wish no ill to anyone, young sir, and to you least of all ... You’re a fine young man, and know many things which we don’t ... If you stay here as equals with us and do no bullying, maybe you will become the first among us just the same...”

“Torrismund, I am weary of so many mishaps,” said Sophronia, raising her veil. “These good people seem reasonable and courteous and the town pleasanter and in better state than many ... Why should we not try to come to an arrangement?”

“What about our suite?”

“They can all become citizens of Koowalden,” replied the inhabitants, “and to each will be given according to his worth.”

“Am I to consider myself an equal to this squire of mine, Gurduloo, who doesn’t even know if he exists or not?”

“He will leam too ... We ourselves did not know we existed ... One can also learn to be...”





12


BOOK, now you have reached your end. These last pages I found myself writing away at breakneck speed. From one line to another I have leapt about among nations and seas and continents. What is this frenzy which has seized me, this impatience? It’s as if I were waiting for something. But what can nuns await, withdrawn here so as to be outside the ever-changing happenings of the world? What else can I await except new pages to cover and the routine ringing of the convent bells?

There, I hear a horse come up the narrow track. Now it stops right at the convent gates. The rider knocks. I can’t stretch far enough out of my little window to see him, but I can hear his voice. “Hey, good sisters, listen!”

But is that his voice, or am I mistaken? Yes, 'tis Raimbaut's voice which I have so long made resound over these pages! What can Raimbaut want here?

“Hey, good sisters, can you please tell me if an Amazon has found refuge in this convent, the famous Bradamante?”

Yes, searching for Bradamante throughout the world, Raimbaut was bound to reach here one day.

I hear the Sister Guardian’s voice reply, “No, soldier, there are no Amazons here, only poor holy women praying for your sins.”

But now I run to the window and cry, “Yes, Raimbaut, I’m here, wait for me, I knew you’d come, I’ll be down, I’ll leave with you.”

And hurriedly I tear off my cloistral bands, my nun’s skirt, pull out of a drawer my little topaz-colored tunic, my cuirass, my helmet, my spurs, my periwinkle blue robe. “Wait for me, Raimbaut, I’m here, I’m here, I, Bradamante!”

Yes, my book. Sister Theodora who tells this tale and the Amazon Bradamante are one and the same. Sometimes I gallop over battlefields after adventures of duels and loves, sometimes I shut myself in convents, meditating and jotting down the adventures that have happened to me, so as to try and understand them. When I came to shut myself in here I was desperate with love for Agilulf, now I burn for the young and passionate Raimbaut.

That is why my pen at a certain point began running on so. I rush to meet him. I knew he would not be long in coming. A page is good only when we turn it and find life urging along, confusing every page in the book. The pen rushes on, urged by the same joy that makes me course the open road. A chapter started when one doesn’t know which tale to tell is like a comer turned on leaving a convent, when one might come face to face with a dragon, a Saracen gang, an enchanted isle or a new love.

I’m hurrying to you, Raimbaut I’m not even bidding the abbess good-bye. They know me already and know that after affrays and affairs and blighted hopes I always return to this cloister. But it will be different now ... It will be...

From describing the past, from the present which seized my hand in its excited grasp, here I am, O future, now mounting the crupper of your horse. What new pennants wilt thou unfurl before me from towers of cities not yet founded? What rivers of devastation set flowing over castles and gardens I have loved? What unforeseeable golden ages art thou preparing—ill-mastered, indomitable harbinger of treasures dearly paid for, my kingdom to be conquered, the future...

THE END




} 1 {


It was on the fifteenth of June, 1767, that Cosimo Piovasco di Rondò, my brother, sat among us for the last time. And it might have been today, I remember it so clearly. We were in the dining room of our house at Ombrosa, the windows framing the thick branches of the great holm oak in the park. It was midday, the old traditional dinner hour followed by our family, though by then most nobles had taken to the fashion set by the sluggard Court of France, of dining halfway through the afternoon. A breeze was blowing from the sea, I remember, rustling the leaves. Cosimo said: "I told you I don't want any, and I don't!" and pushed away his plateful of snails. Never had we seen such disobedience.

At the head of the table was the Baron Arminio Piovasco di Rondò, our father, wearing a long wig over his ears in the style of Louis XIV, unfashionable like so much else about him. Between me and my brother was the Abbé Fauchelefleur, the family almoner and tutor of us two boys. We were facing our mother, the Baroness Corradina di Rondò, nicknamed the Generalessa, and our sister Battista, a kind of stay-at-home-nun. At the other end of the table, opposite our father, sat, dressed in Turkish robes, the Cavalier Avvocato Enea Silvio Carrega, lawyer, administrator and waterworks supervisor of our estates, and our natural uncle, being the illegitimate brother of our father.

A few months before, Cosimo having reached the age of twelve and I of eight, we had been admitted to the parental board; I had benefited by my brother's promotion and been moved up prematurely, so that I should not be left to eat alone. "Benefited" is perhaps scarcely the word, for really it meant the end of our carefree life, Cosimo's and mine, and we were homesick for the meals in our little room, alone with the Abbé Fauchelefleur. The Abbé was a dry, wrinkled old man, with a reputation as a Jansenist; and he had in fact escaped from his native land, the Dauphin to avoid trial by the Inquisition. But the rigor of character for which he was so often praised, the severe mental discipline that he imposed on himself and others, was apt to yield to a deep-rooted urge toward apathy and indolence, as if his long meditations with eyes staring into space had but brought on him a great weariness and boredom, and in every little difficulty now he had come to see a fate not worth opposing. Our meals in the Abbé's company used to begin, after many a prayer, with ordered ritual, silent movements of spoons, and woe to anyone who raised his eyes from his plate or made the slightest sucking noise with the soup; but by the end of the first dish the Abbé was already tired, bored, looking into space and smacking his lips at every sip of wine, as if only the most fleeting and superficial sensations could get through to him; by the main dish we were using our hands, and by the end of the meal were throwing pear cores at each other, while the Abbé every now and again let out one of his languid ". . . Oooo bien! . . . Oooo alors."

Now, at table with the family, up surged the intimate grudges that are such a burden of childhood. Having our father and mother always there in front of us, using knives and forks for the chicken, keeping our backs straight and our elbows down—what a strain it all was!—not to mention the presence of that odious sister of ours, Battista. So began a series of scenes, spiteful exchanges, punishments, retaliations, until the day when Cosimo refused the snails and decided to separate his fate from ours.

These accumulating family resentments I myself only noticed later; then I was eight, everything seemed a game, the battle between us boys and grownups was the same as in all families, and I did not realize that my brother's stubbornness hid something much deeper.

Our father the Baron was a bore, it's true, though not a bad roan: a bore because his life was dominated by conflicting ideas, as often happens in periods of transition. The turbulence of the times makes some people feel a need to bestir themselves, but in the opposite direction, backwards rather than forwards; so, with things boiling up all around him, our father had set his heart on regaining the lapsed title of Duke of Ombrosa, and thought of nothing but genealogies and successions and family rivalries and alliances with grandees near and far.

Life at our home was like a constant dress rehearsal for an appearance at court, either the Emperor of Austria's, King Louis', or even the court of those mountaineers from Turin. When, for instance, a turkey was served, our father would watch us like a hawk, to see if we carved and boned it according to royal rules, and the Abbé scarcely dared touch a morsel lest he make some error of etiquette, for, poor man, he had to add his own rebukes to our father's. And we saw now a deceitful side of the Cavalier Carrega; he would smuggle away whole legs under the folds of his Turkish robe, to munch them bit by bit later, at his ease, hidden in the vineyard; and we could have sworn (although we never succeeded in catching him in the act—his movements were so quick) that he came to table with a pocketful of stripped bones, to be left on the table in place of the hunks of turkey he whisked away. Our mother the Generalessa did not worry us, as even when serving herself at table she used brusque military manners, "So! Noch ein wenig! Gut!" and no one found fault with her: she held us not to etiquette, but to discipline, supporting the Baron with parade-ground orders, "Sitz ruhig! And wipe your nose!" The only person really at ease was Battista, the nun of tile house, who would sit shredding her chicken with precise deliberation, fiber by fiber, using some sharp little knives, rather like a surgeon's scalpels, which she alone had. The Baron, who should have held her up to us as an example, did not dare look at her, for, with her staring eyes under the starched coif, her narrow teeth set tight in her yellow rodent's face, she frightened him too. So it can be seen why our family board brought out all the antagonisms, the incompatibilities, between us, and all our follies and hypocrisies too; and why it was there that Cosimo's rebellion came to a head. That is why I have described it at some length—and anyway it is the last set table we shall find in my brother's life, that's sure.

It was also the only place where we would meet the grownups. The rest of the day our mother spent in her apartments, doing lace and embroidery and petit point; for in truth it was only in these traditionally womanly occupations that the Generalessa could vent her warrior's urge. The lace and embroidery were usually in the designs of geographical maps; our mother would stretch them over cushions or tapestry and stick in pins and tiny flags, showing the disposition of battles in the Wars of Succession, which she knew by heart. Or she would embroider cannons, with the trajectories from the muzzle and the line of flight and the signs of anglings, for she was highly competent in ballistics, and also had at her disposal the entire library of her father the General, with treatises on military lore and atlases and tables of fire. Our mother was a Von Kurtewitz-Konradine, daughter of General Konrad von Kurtewitz, who, twenty years before, had commanded the Empress Maria Theresa's troops, which had occupied our area. A widower, the General had taken her around with him from camp to camp; there was nothing exciting about that, for they traveled well equipped, put up at the best castles, with a suite of servants, and she had spent her days making lace on a cushion. All the stories people told of her going into battle with him were legends. She had always been an ordinary little woman with a rosy face and a snub nose, in spite of that inherited zest for things military, which was perhaps a way of showing up her husband.

Our father was one of the few nobles in our parts who had been on the side of the Empire in that war; he had greeted General von Kurtewitz with open arms, put our retainers at his disposal, and even shown his great devotion to the Imperial cause by marrying Konradine—all this with an eye to that duchy; and he was considerably put out when the Imperial troops soon moved on, as usual, and the Genoese came down on him for taxes. But he had gained a good wife, the Generalessa, as she began to be called after the death of her father on the Provence expedition (when Maria Theresa sent her a golden collar on a cushion of brocade), a wife with whom he nearly always got along, even if she, born and bred in camps, thought of nothing but armies and battles and criticized him for being just an ineffectual schemer.

But at heart they were still living in the times of the Wars of Succession, she with her artillery, he with his genealogical trees; she dreaming of a career for us boys in some army, no matter which; he, on the other hand, seeing us married to a grand duchess and electress of the Empire. . . With all this, they were excellent parents, but so absent-minded that Cosimo and I were usually left to our own devices during our childhood. Who can say if that was a good thing or a bad? Cosimo's life was so uncommon, mine so ordinary and modest, and yet our childhood was spent together, both of us indifferent to the manias of adults, both trying to find paths unbeaten by others.

We clambered about the trees (those innocent games come back to me now as a first initiation, an omen; but who could even have thought it then?), we followed the mountain streams, jumping from rock to rock, exploring caves on the seashore, and we would slide down the marble banisters in the house. It was one of these slides that caused the first serious rift between Cosimo and our parents, for he was punished—unjustly, he declared—and since then harbored a grudge against the family (or society? or the world in general?) which was to express itself later in his decision of that fifteenth of June.

As a matter of fact, we had already been warned against sliding down the marble banisters, not out of fear that we might break a leg or an arm, for that never worried our parents—which was, I think, why we never broke anything—but because they feared that since we were growing up and gaining weight, we might knock over the busts of ancestors placed by our father on the banisters at the turn of every flight of stairs. Cosimo had, in fact, once brought down a bishop, a great-great-great-grandfather, miter and all; he was punished, and since then he had learned to brake just before reaching the turn of a flight and jump off within a hair's-breadth of running into a bust. I learned this trick too, for I copied all he did, except that I, ever more careful and timid, jumped off halfway down, or slid the rest bit by bit, with constant little brakes. One day he was flying down the banisters like an arrow when who should be coming up but the Abbé Fauchelefleur, meandering from stair to stair, with his breviary open in front of him, and his gaze fixed on space like a hen's. If only he had been half asleep as usual! But no, he was in one of those sudden moods that occasionally came over him, of extreme attention and awareness. He saw Cosimo, and thought: Banisters, bust, he'll hit it, they'll blame me too (at every escapade of ours he used to be blamed also for not keeping an eye on us), and he flung himself on the banister to catch my brother. Cosimo banged into the Abbé, dragged him down the banister too (the old man was just skin and bones), found he could not brake, and hit with double force the statue of our ancestor Cacciaguerra Piovasco the Crusader; they all landed in a heap at the foot of the stairs—the Crusader in smithereens (he was plaster), the Abbé and Cosimo. There followed endless recriminations, a beating, his being locked in our room on bread and cold minestrone. And Cosimo, who felt innocent because the fault had not been his but the Abbé's, came out furiously with the phrase: "Fie on all your ancestors, Father!"—a portent of his mission as a rebel.

Our sister felt the same at heart. She, too, though the isolation in which she lived had been forced on her by our father after that affair of the Marchesino della Mela, had always been a rebellious and lonely soul. What happened with the Marchesino, none of us ever really knew. How, as the son of a family hostile to ours, had he ever got into the house? And why? It could only be to seduce, no, rather to rape our sister, said my father in the long quarrel which ensued between the families. We boys, in fact, could never succeed in picturing that freckled simpleton as a seducer, least of all of our sister, who was certainly much stronger than him, and famous for beating the stable hands at competitions of physical strength. And then, why was it he who shouted for help, not her? And how did the servants who rushed to the scene, led by our father, come to find him with his breeches torn to strips as if by the talons of a tiger? The Della Mela family refused even to admit that their son had made an attempt on Battista's virtue or to agree to a marriage between them. So our sister was eventually confined to the house, dressed up as a nun, though without taking any vows even as a tertiary, in view of her rather dubious vocation.

Her evil schemes found expression in cooking. She was a really excellent cook, for she had the primary gifts in the culinary art: diligence and imagination; but when she put her hand to it, no one ever knew what surprise might appear at table. Once she made some paté toast, really exquisite, of rats' livers; this she never told us until we had eaten them and pronounced them good; and some grasshoppers' claws, crisp and sectioned, laid on an open tart in a mosaic; and pigs' tails baked as if they were little cakes; and once she cooked a complete porcupine with all its quills—who knows why, probably just to give us all a shock at the raising of the dish cover, for even she, who usually ate everything, however odd, that she had prepared herself, refused to taste it, though it was a baby porcupine, rosy and certainly tender. In fact, most of these horrible dishes of hers were thought out just for effect, rather than for any pleasure in making us eat disgusting food with her. These dishes of Battista's were works of the most delicate animal or vegetable jewelry; cauliflower heads with hares' ears set on a collar of fur; or a pig's head from whose mouth stuck a scarlet lobster as if putting out its tongue, and the lobster was holding the pig's tongue in its pincers as if they had torn it out. And finally the snails; she had managed to behead I don't know how many snails, and the heads, those soft little equine heads, she had inserted, I think with a toothpick, each in a wire-mesh; they looked, as they came on the table, like a flight of tiny swans. Even more revolting than the sight of these delicacies was the thought of Battista's zealous determination in preparing them, of those thin hands of hers tearing the little creatures to pieces.

It was as a protest against this macabre fantasy of our sister's that my brother and I were incited to show our sympathy with the poor tortured creatures, and our disgust, too, for the flavor of cooked snails—a revolt really against everything and everybody; and from this, not surprisingly, stemmed Cosimo's gesture and all that followed after.

We had devised a plan. When the Cavalier brought home a basket full of eatable snails, these were put into a barrel in the cellar, so they should starve, or eat only bran and so be purged. When we moved the planks covering these barrels an inferno was revealed: snails moving up the staves with a languor which was already a presage of their death agony, amid remnants of bran, streaks of opaque clotted slime and multicolored excrement, mementos of the good old days of open air and grass. Some of them were right outside their shells with heads extended, and waving horns; some all curled up, showing a different pair of antennae. Others were grouped like village gossips, others shut and sleeping, others dead, with their shells upside down. To save them from meeting that sinister cook, and to save us from her ministrations too, we made a hole in the bottom of the barrel, and from there traced as hidden a trail as we could, with bits of chopped grass and honey, behind barrels and various tools in the cellar, to draw the snails toward a little window facing an uncultivated grassy field.

Next day we went down into the cellar to see the results, and we inspected the walls and passage by candlelight—"One here! . . . And another there!. . . And just see where this one got to!" Already there was an almost continuous line of snails moving from the barrel over the flagstones and walls toward the little window, following our trail. "Quick, snaily-wailies! Hurry up, out!" we could not help shouting at them, seeing the creatures moving along so slowly, now and then going around and around in circles over the rough cellar walls, attracted by occasional fly-droppings and mildew. But the cellar was dark and cluttered; we hoped no one would notice them, and that they would all have time to escape.

But that restless creature, our sister Battista, used to spend the nights wandering around the house in search of mice, holding a candelabra, with a musket under her arm. That night she went down into the cellar, and the candlelight shone on a lost snail on the ceiling, with its trail of silvery slime. A shot rang out. We all started in our beds, but soon dropped our heads back onto the pillows, used as we were to the night hunts of our resident nun. But Battista, having destroyed the snail and brought down a hunk of plaster with her instinctive shot, now began to shout in that strident voice of hers: "Help! They're all escaping! Help!" Half-dressed servants hurried to her, our father came armed with a saber, the Abbé without his wig; the Cavalier did not even find out what was happening, but ran off into the woods to avoid the fuss and went to sleep in a haystack.

Everyone began hunting the snails all over the cellar by the light of torches—no one with any real will, but stubbornly, so as not to admit being disturbed for nothing. They found the hole in the barrel, and at once realized we had made it. Our father came with the coachman's whip and seized us from bed. Then, our backs, buttocks and legs covered with violet weals, we were locked into the squalid little room used as a prison.

They kept us there three days, on bread, water, lettuce, beef rinds and cold minestrone (which, luckily, we liked). Then, as if nothing had happened, we were brought out for our first family meal at midday on that fifteenth of June; and what should the kitchen superintendent, our sister Battista, have prepared for us but snail soup and snails as a main course! Cosimo refused to touch even a mouthful. "Eat up or we'll shut you in the little room again!" I yielded and began to chew the wretched mollusks (a cowardice on my part which had the effect of making my brother feel more alone than ever, so that his leaving us was also partly a protest against me for letting him down; but I was only eight years old, and then how can I compare my own strength of will, particularly as a child, to the superhuman tenacity which my brother showed throughout his life?).

"Well?" said our father to Cosimo.

"No, and no again!" exclaimed Cosimo, and pushed his plate away.

"Leave the table!"

But Cosimo had already turned his back on us all and was leaving the room.

"Where are you going?"

We saw him through the glass door as he picked up his tricorn and rapier.

"I know where I'm going!" And he ran out into the garden.

In a little while we watched him, from the windows, climbing up the holm oak. He was dressed up in the most formal clothes and headdress, because our father insisted on his appearing at table this way in spite of his twelve years of age—powdered hair with a ribbon around the queue, three-cornered hat, lace stock and ruffles, green tunic with pointed tails, purple breeches, rapier, and long white leather gaiters halfway up his legs, the only concession to a mode of dressing more suitable to our country life. (I, being only eight, was exempted from powdered hair except on gala occasions, and from the rapier, which I should have liked to wear.) So he climbed up the knobby old tree, moving his arms and legs along the branches with the sureness and speed which came to him from years of our practicing together.

I have mentioned that we used to spend hours and hours on the trees, and not for ulterior motives as most boys, who go up only in search of fruit or birds' nests, but for the pleasure of getting over difficult parts of the trunks and forks, reaching as high as we could, and finding a good perch on which to pause and look down at the world below, to call and joke at those passing by. So I found it quite natural that Cosimo's first thought, at that unjust attack on him, was to climb up the holm oak, to us a familiar tree spreading its' branches to the height of the dining room windows through which he could show his proud offended air to the whole family.

"Vorsicht! Vorsicht! Now he'll fall down, poor little thing!" anxiously exclaimed our mother, who would not have turned a hair at seeing us under cannon fire, but was nevertheless in agony over our games.

Cosimo climbed up to the fork of a big branch, where he could settle comfortably, and sat himself down there, his legs dangling, his arms crossed with hands tucked under his elbows, his head buried in his shoulders, his tricorn hat tilted over his forehead.

Our father leaned out the window. "When you're tired of being up there, you'll change your mind!" he shouted.

"I'll never change my mind," exclaimed my brother from the branch.

"You'll see as soon as you come down!"

"I'll never come down again!" And he kept his word.





} 2 {


COSIMO was in the holm oak. The branches spread out—high bridges over the earth. A slight breeze blew; the sun shone. It shone through the leaves, so that we had to shade our eyes with our hands to see Cosimo. From the tree Cosimo looked at the world; everything seen from up there was different, which was fun in itself. The alley took on a new aspect, and so did the flower beds, the hortensias, the camellias, the iron table for coffee in the garden. Farther away, the tops of the trees thinned out and the kitchen garden merged into little terraced fields propped by stone walls; the middle ground was dark with olive trees, and beyond that the village of Ombrosa thrust up roofs of slate and faded brick, and down at the port ships' masts. In the distance was the sea where a boat was idly sailing—and beyond, a wide horizon.

And now out into the garden, after their coffee, came the Baron and the Generalessa. They stood looking at a rosebush, pretending not to take any notice of Cosimo. They were arm-in-arm first, then soon drew apart to talk and gesture. But I moved under the holm oak as if I were playing on my own, though really to try and attract Cosimo's attention; he was still feeling resentful of me, and stayed up there looking away into the distance. I stopped and crouched down under a bench so as to go on watching him without being seen.

My brother sat there like a sentinel. He looked at everything, but nothing looked like anything to him. A woman with a basket was passing between the rows of lemon trees. Up the path came a muleteer holding on to his mule by the tail. The two never set eyes on each other; at the sound of the metal-shod hoofs the woman turned around and moved toward the path but did not reach it in time. She broke into song then, but the muleteer had already rounded the bend; he listened, cracked his whip and said "Aaah!" to the mule; nothing more. Cosimo saw it all.

Now along the path passed the Abbé Fauchelefleur with his open breviary. Cosimo took something from the branch and threw it at his head. I was not sure what it was, a little spider perhaps, or a piece of bark; anyway, it did not hit him. Cosimo then began to search about with his rapier in a hole of the trunk. Out came a furious wasp. He chased it away with a wave of his hat and followed its flight with his eyes until it settled on a pumpkin plant. From the house, speedy as ever, came the Cavalier, who hurried down the steps into the gardens and vanished among the rows of vines; Cosimo climbed onto a higher branch to see where he went. There was a flutter of wings among the leaves, and out flew a blackbird. Cosimo was rather sorry it had been up there all that time without his noticing it. He looked into the sunshine for others. No, there were none.

The holm oak was near an elm: their two crests almost touched. A branch of the elm passed a foot or so above a branch of the other tree; it was easy for my brother to pass and so reach the top of the elm, which we had never explored, as it had a high trunk with no branches reachable from the ground. From the elm, by a branch elbow-to-elbow with the next tree, he passed on to a carob, and then to a mulberry tree. So I saw Cosimo advance from one branch to another, suspended high above the garden.

Some branches of the big mulberry tree reached and overlapped the boundary wall of our property, beyond which lay the gardens of the Ondarivas. Although we were neighbors, we knew none of the Ondariva family, marquises and nobles of Ombrosa, as for a number of generations they had enjoyed certain feudal rights claimed by our father, and the two families were separated by mutual antipathy, just as our properties were separated by a high fortress-like wall put up by either our father or the Marquis, I am not sure which. To this should be added the jealous care which the Ondarivas took of their garden, full, it was said, of the rarest plants. In fact, the grandfather of the present Marquis had been a pupil of the botanist Linnaeus, and since his time all the family connections at the courts of France and England had been set in motion to send the finest botanical rarities from the colonies. For years boats had unloaded at the port of Ombrosa sacks of seeds, bundles of cuttings, potted shrubs and even entire trees with huge wrappings of sacking around the roots; until the garden—it was said—had become a mixture of the forests of India and the Americas, and even of New Holland.

All that we were able to see were some dark leaves, growing over the garden wall, of a newly imported tree from the American colonies, the magnolia, from whose black branches sprang a pulpy white flower. Cosimo, on our mulberry, reached the comer of the wall, balanced on it for a step or two and then, holding on by his hands, jumped down on to the other side, amid the flowers and leaves of the magnolia. Then he vanished from sight; and what I am about to tell—as also much else in this account of his life—he described to me afterwards, or I have put together from a few scattered hints and guesses.

Cosimo was on the magnolia. Although the branches were very close together, this was an easy tree to maneuver on for a boy so expert in all trees as my brother; and the branches, although they were slender and of soft wood, held his weight, and the points of his shoes tore white wounds on the black bark; he was enveloped in the fresh scent of leaves, turned this way and that by the wind in pages of contrasting greens, dull one moment and glittering the next.

But the whole garden was scented, and although Cosimo could not yet see it clearly, because of all the thick trees, he was already exploring it by smell, and trying to discern the source of the various aromas which he already knew from their being wafted over into our garden by the wind. And to us this seemed an integral part of the mystery of the place. Then he looked at the branches and saw new leaves, some big and shining as if running water were constantly flowing over them, some tiny and feathered, and tree trunks either all smooth or all scaly.

There was a great silence. A flight of little wrens went up, chirping. And now a faint voice could be heard singing: "O la-la . . . O la ba-lan-çoire. . ." Cosimo looked down. From the branch of a big tree nearby was dangling a swing, and on it was sitting a little girl about his age.

She was a blonde, with hair combed high in an odd style for a girl her age, and a light blue dress which was also too grown up; its skirt, as it rose with the swing, was swirling with lace petticoats. The girl had her eyes half closed and her nose in the air as if used to playing the lady, and she was eating an apple in little bites, bending her head down toward her hand, which had to hold the apple and balance her on the rope of the swing at the same time; and every time the swing reached the lowest point of its flight she would give herself little pushes on the ground with the end of her tiny shoes, blow out bits of apple peel and sing "O la-la-la. . . O la ba-lan-çoire. . ." as if she cared neither for the swing, nor the song, nor (though perhaps a little more) for the apple, and had other things on her mind.

Cosimo dropped from the top of the magnolia to a lower perch, and now had his feet set on each side of a fork and his elbows leaning on a branch in front as on a window sill. The flight of the swing was bringing the little girl right up under his nose.

She was not watching and did not notice. Then suddenly she saw him there, standing on the tree, in tricorn and gaiters. "Oh!" she said.

The apple fell from her hand and rolled away to the foot of the magnolia. Cosimo drew his rapier, leaned down from the lowest branch, skewered the apple and offered it to the girl, who had meanwhile made a complete turn on the swing and was up there again. "Take it, it's not dirty, only a little bruised on one side."

The fair little girl now seemed to be regretting she had shown so much surprise at the sudden appearance of this strange boy on the magnolia, and put on her disdainful air again with her nose in the air. "Are you a thief?" she said.

"A thief?" exclaimed Cosimo, offended. Then he thought it over; the idea rather pleased him. "Yes, I am," he said, pulling his tricorn down over one eye. "Any objection?"

"And what have you come to steal?"

Cosimo looked at the apple which he had skewered on the point of his rapier, and suddenly realized he was hungry, as he had scarcely touched a thing at table. "This apple," said he, and began to peel it with one side of his rapier, which, in spite of family orders, he kept very sharp.

"Then you're a fruit thief," said the girl.

My brother thought of the rabble of poor urchins from Ombrosa who scrambled over walls and hedges sacking orchards, boys he had been taught to despise and avoid; and for the first time he thought how free and enviable their life must be. Well now: he might become like them, and live as they did, from now on. "Yes," he said. He cut the apple into slices and began eating it.

The girl broke into a laugh which lasted a whole flight of the swing, up and down. "Oh, go on! The boys who steal fruit! I know them all! They're all friends of mine! And they go round barefoot, in shirt sleeves and tousled hair, not with gaiters and powder!"

My brother turned as red as the apple peel. To be laughed at not only for his powdered hair, which he didn't like at all, but also for his gaiters, which he liked a lot; to be considered inferior in appearance to a fruit thief, to boys he had despised till a moment before; and above all to find that this girl who seemed quite at home in the Ondariva gardens was a friend of all the fruit thieves but not of his, all this made him feel annoyed, jealous and ashamed.

"O la-la-la. . . In gaiters and powder!" hummed the little girl on the swing.

For a moment his pride was stung. "I'm not a thief like the boys you know!'' he shouted. "I'm not a thief at all! I only said that so's not to frighten you; if you really knew who I was you'd die of fright! I'm a brigand, a terrible brigand!"

The little girl went on flying through the air under his nose, almost as if wanting to graze him with the point of her shoes. "Oh, nonsense. Where's your musket? Brigands all have muskets! And catapults! I've seen them! They stopped our coach five times on the way here from the castle!"

"But not the chief! I'm the chief! The chief of the brigands doesn't carry a musket! Only a sword!" and he held out his little rapier.

The little girl shrugged her shoulders. "The chief brigand," she said, "is a man called Gian dei Brughi, and he always brings me presents at Christmas and Easter!"

"Ah!" exclaimed Cosimo di Rondò, seized by a wave of family rancor. "Then my father's right when he says that the Marquis of Ondariva is the protector of all the brigands and smugglers around."

The girl swept down to the ground and instead of giving herself a push, braked with a quick little stamp of the foot, and jumped off. The empty swing leaped back into the air on its ropes. "Get down from there at once! How dare you come on to our land!" she exclaimed, pointing a furious finger at the boy.

"I haven't and I won't come on to it," answered Cosimo with equal warmth. "I've never set foot on your land, and I wouldn't for all the gold in the world!"

Then the girl very calmly took up a fan lying on a wicker chair, and though it was not very hot, began fanning herself and walking up and down. "Now," she said in a steady voice, "I'll call the servants and have you taken and beaten! That'll teach you to trespass on our land!" She was constantly changing tone, this girl, putting my brother out every time.

"Where I am isn't land and isn't yours!" proclaimed Cosimo, and felt tempted to add: "And I'm Duke of Ombrosa too, and lord of the whole area," but he held himself back, as he did not want to repeat things his father was always saying now that he had quarreled with him and run away from his table; he did not want to and did not think it right; also those claims to the dukedom had always seemed just obsessions to him; why should he, Cosimo, now start boasting of being a duke? But he did not want to contradict himself and so went on saying whatever came into his head. "This isn't yours," he repeated, "because it's the ground that's yours, and if I put a foot on it I would be trespassing. But up here, I can go wherever I like."

"Oh, so it's all yours, up there. . ."

"Yes! It's all mine up here"—and he waved vaguely toward the branches, the leaves against the sun, the sky. "On the branches it's all mine. Tell 'em to come and fetch me, and just see if they can!"

Now, after all that boasting, he half expected her to begin jeering at him in some way. Instead of which she seemed suddenly interested. "Ah yes? And how far does it reach, this property of yours?"

"As far as I can get on the trees, here, there, beyond the wall, in the olive groves, up the hill, the other side of the hill, the wood, the Bishop's Land. . ."

"As far as France?"

"As far as Poland and Saxony," said Cosimo, who knew nothing of geography but the names he had heard from our mother when she talked of the Wars of Succession. "But I'm not selfish like you. I invite you into my property." Now they were calling each other by the familiar "tu"; it was she who had begun.

"And whose is the swing, then?" said she, sitting down and opening her fan.

"The swing's yours," pronounced Cosimo, "but as it's tied to this tree, it depends on me. So, when you're touching the earth with your feet you're in your property, when you're in the air you're in mine."

She gave herself a push and flew off, her hands tight on the ropes. Cosimo jumped from the magnolia on to the thick branch which held the swing, seized the ropes from there and began pushing her himself. The swing went higher and higher.

"Are you frightened?"

"No, not me. What's your name?"

"Mine's Cosimo . . . And yours?"

"Violante but they call me Viola."

"They call me Mino, too, as Cosimo's an old man's name."

"I don't like it."

"Cosimo?"

"No, Mino."

"Ah . . . you can call me Cosimo."

"Wouldn't think of it! Listen, you, we must get things straight."

"How do you mean?" exclaimed he, who was put out by everything she said.

"What I say! I can come up into your property and be an honored guest, d'you see? I come and go as I please. You, though, are sacred and untouchable while you stay in the trees, on your property, but as soon as you set a foot on the soil of my garden you become my slave and I put you in chains."

"No, I'm not coming down into your garden or into mine either ever again. It's all enemy territory to me. You come up with me, and your friends who steal fruit, and perhaps my brother Biagio too, though he's a bit of a coward, and we'll make an army in the trees and bring the earth and the people on it to their senses."

"No, no, not at all. Just let me explain how things are. You have the lordship of the trees, all right? But if you touch the earth just once with your foot, you lose your whole kingdom and become the humblest slave. D'you understand? Even if a branch breaks under you and you fall, it's the end of you!"

"I've never fallen from a tree in my life!"

"No, of course not, but if you do fall, if you do, you change into ashes and the wind'll carry you away."

"Fairy tales. I'm not coming down to the ground because I don't want to."

"Oh, what a bore you are!"

"No, no, let's play. For instance, can I come on to the swing?"

"Yes, if you manage to sit on it without touching the ground."

Near Viola's swing was another one, hanging on the same branch, but pulled up by a knot in the ropes so it should not bump against the other. Cosimo let himself down from the branch by gripping one of the ropes—an exercise he was very good at as our mother had made him do a lot of gymnastics—reached the knot, undid it, stood up on the swing, and to give himself impetus bent down on his knees and rocked the weight of his body to and fro. So he got higher and higher. The two swings moved in opposite directions, at the same height now, and passed each other halfway.

"But if you try sitting down and giving a push with your feet you'll go higher," Viola said.

Cosimo made a face at her.

"Come down and give me a push, now, do," said she, smiling sweetly at him.

"No, I said I wouldn't come down at any cost. . ." And Cosimo began to feel put out again.

"Do, please."

"No."

"Ah, hah! You nearly fell into the trap! If you'd set a foot on the ground you'd have lost everything!" Viola got off her swing and began giving little pushes to Cosimo's. "Oh!" Suddenly she had snatched the seat of the swing on which my brother was standing and overturned it. Luckily Cosimo was holding tight to the ropes. Otherwise he would have dropped to the ground like a ripe fruit.

"Cheat!" he cried, and clambered up again on the two ropes, but going up was much more difficult than coming down, particularly with the fair-haired girl maliciously pulling the ropes as hard as she could.

Finally he reached the big branch, and got astride it. With his lace jabot he wiped the sweat off his forehead.

"Ah! Ah! You didn't get me!"

"Very nearly."

"And I thought you were a friend!"

"You thought!" and she began fanning herself again.

"Violante!" broke in a sharp female voice at that moment. "Who are you talking to?"

On the white flight of steps leading to the house had appeared a tall, thin lady, with a very wide skirt; she was looking through a lorgnette. Alarmed, Cosimo drew back into the leaves.

"With a young man, ma tante," said the little girl, "who was born on the top of a tree and is under a spell so he can't set foot on the ground."

Cosimo, scarlet in the face, asked himself if the little girl was talking like that to make fun of him in front of her aunt, or to make fun of the aunt in front of him, or just to continue the game, or because she did not care a rap about either him or the aunt or the game, and he saw he was being watched through the lorgnette, whose owner had approached the tree and was gazing at him as if he were some strange parrot.

"Uh, mais c'est un des Piovasques, ce jeune homme, je crois. Viens, Violante."

Cosimo bridled with shame; the way the aunt recognized him so easily without even asking herself why he was there and at once called the girl away firmly though not severely, the way Viola followed her aunt's call docilely without even turning around—it all suggested that they considered him of no importance, a person who scarcely existed. And so that extraordinary afternoon of his was fading into a cloud of self-pity.

Then suddenly the girl made a sign to her aunt, the aunt lowered her head, and the child whispered in her ear. The aunt pointed her lorgnette at Cosimo again. "Well, young man," she said, "would you care to take a cup of chocolate with us? Then we too can get to know you"—and here she gave a sideways glance at Viola—"as you're already a friend of the family."

Cosimo sat there staring round-eyed at aunt and niece. His heart was beating fast. Here he was being invited by the Ondarivas of Ombrosa, the haughtiest family in the neighborhood, and the humiliation of a moment before changed to triumph: he was getting back at his father by this invitation from enemies who had always snubbed him, and Viola had interceded for him, and he was now officially accepted as a friend of hers and would play with her in that garden so different from all other gardens. All this Cosimo felt, but an opposite though confused emotion at the same time; an emotion made up of shyness, prides loneliness and determination; and amid this contrast of feelings my brother seized the branch above him, climbed it, moved into the leafiest part, on to another tree, and vanished.





} 3 {


IT WAS endless, that afternoon. Every now and then we heard a plop, a rustle in the garden, and ran out hoping that it was him, that he had decided to come down. But no, I saw a quiver on the top of the magnolia; Cosimo appeared from the other side of the wall and climbed over.

I went up the mulberry to meet him. At seeing me he seemed put out; he was still angry with me. Sitting on a branch of the mulberry above me, he began slicing off bits of bark with his rapier, as if he did not want to speak to me.

"The mulberry is easy," I exclaimed, just for something to say. "We'd never been on it before . . ."

He went on whittling the branch with the blade, then said sourly: "Well, did you enjoy the snails?"

I held out a basket. "I've brought you some dried figs, Mino, and a slice of pie . . ."

"Did they send you?" he exclaimed, still distant, but his mouth watering as he looked at the basket.

"No, I had to escape from the Abbé," I said hurriedly. "They wanted to keep me doing lessons all the afternoon, so I couldn't see you, but the old man fell asleep! Mother's worried you might fall and wanted a search made for you, but since Father hasn't seen you on the holm oak for a while, he says you've come down and are hiding away brooding over your misdeeds, and we're not to worry."

"I never came down!" said my brother.

"Have you been in the Ondariva garden?"

"Yes, but always from one tree to another, without ever touching the ground!"

"Why?" I asked. It was the first time I heard him announce this rule of his, but he had said it as if it were already understood between us, almost as if he wanted to reassure me that he had not broken it; so I did not dare persist in my questions.

Instead of answering me, he said: "You know, it'd take days and days to explore that garden of the Ondarivas! If you saw the trees! From the American forests!" Then he remembered he was angry with me and so should not enjoy telling me of his finds. He finished, brusquely: "Anyway I won't take you there. You can go around here with Battista, from now on, or the Cavalier!"

"No, Mino, do take me!" I exclaimed. "You mustn't blame me about the snails, they were foul, but I couldn't bear their scolding!"

Cosimo was gulping down the tart. "I'll try you out," he said. "You've got to show me you're on my side, not on theirs."

"Ask me anything you want, then."

"Get me some ropes, long strong ones, as I'll have to tie myself to get over some places up here: then an oarlock, and hooks and nails . . . big ones . . ."

"What d'you want to make? A crane?"

"We'll need to get a lot of stuff up, we'll see later; planks, bamboo . . ."

"You want to make a hut in a tree! Where?"

"If needs be. We'll choose the place later. Meanwhile you can leave the things for me there in that hollow oak. Then I'll let down the basket by the rope and you can put whatever I need in it."

"But why? You talk as if you're going on hiding for a long time . . . Don't you think they'll forgive you?"

He turned around, red in the face. "What do I care if they forgive me or not? And I'm not hiding; I'm not afraid of anyone! What about you, are you afraid of helping me?"

Though I now realized that my brother was refusing to come down for the time being, I pretended not to understand this so as to make him declare himself and say, for instance: "Yes, I want to stay in the trees till afternoon tea, or dusk, or supper, or till it gets dark," something in fact which would show a limit, a proportion to his protest. Instead of which he said nothing of the kind, and I began to feel alarmed.

Calls came from down below. It was our father shouting, "Cosimo! Cosimo!" and then, realizing already that Cosimo would not answer him, "Biagio! Biagio!" He was calling me.

"I'll go and see what they want. Then I'll come and tell you," said I hurriedly. This eagerness to keep my brother informed also, I must admit, coincided with a hurry to get away for fear of being caught consorting with him on top of the mulberry and having to share the punishment he was certain to get. But Cosimo did not seem to see this shadow of cowardice on my face; he let me go, not without shrugging his shoulders to show how little he cared about what our father might have to say to him.

When I got back he was still there; he had found a good place to settle, on a lopped branch, and was sitting with his chin on his knees and his arms tight around his shins.

"Mino! Mino!" I called, clambering breathlessly up. "They've forgiven you! They're waiting for us! There's tea on the table, and Father and Mother already sitting down and putting out slices of cake on the plates! And there's a cream and chocolate cake, but not made by Battista, you know! She must have shut herself in her room, red with rage! They stroked my hair and said: 'Go and tell poor Mino we'll make it all up and not mention it again!' Quick, let's go!"

Cosimo was chewing a leaf. He did not move.

"Hey," said he, "try to fetch me a blanket, will you, without anyone seeing, and bring it to me. It must be cold, up here, at night."

"You're not going to spend the night in the trees!"

He did not answer. Chin on knees, he went on chewing the leaf and looking ahead. I followed his look, which went straight to the wall of the Ondariva garden, just where the white magnolia flower showed, with a kite flying beyond it.

So we got to evening. The servants came and went laying the table; in the dining room the candelabra were already lit. Cosimo must have been able to see all this from the tree, and Baron Arminio turned to the shadows outside the window and called: "If you want to stay up there, you'll starve!"

That evening we sat down to supper without Cosimo for the first time. He was astride a high branch of the holm oak, sideways, so that we could see only his dangling legs; and we could only just see those if we leaned out of the window and peered, for the room was brightly lit and it was dark outside.

Even the Cavalier felt it his duty to lean out and say something, but as usual he could not manage to express any opinion on the matter. All he said was: "Oooh . . . strong wood . . . It'll last a hundred years . . ." and then a few words in Turkish, perhaps the one for holm oak; he seemed, in fact, to be talking about the tree and not my brother.

Our sister Battista, on the other hand, showed a kind of envy for Cosimo, as if, used to keeping the family on tenterhooks with her crazy whims, she had now been outdone at her own game; and she was endlessly biting her nails (she would bite them without raising a finger to her mouth, but lowering her head and raising her elbow).

The Generalessa was reminded of some soldiers who had been on sentry duty in the trees around a camp either in Slavonia or Pomerania, and how they had sighted the enemy, and so avoided an ambush. This memory, quite suddenly, brought her out of her maternal preoccupations and back to her favorite military atmosphere, and now, as if she had finally succeeded in understanding her son's behavior, she became calmer, almost proud. No one paid any attention to her except the Abbé Fauchelefleur, who listened with grave assent to her warlike tale and the parallel she drew from it, for he would have grasped at any argument to persuade himself that what was happening was natural and so clear his mind of responsibility and worry.

After supper we went off to sleep early, not changing our schedule even that night. By now our parents had decided that they would not give Cosimo the satisfaction of taking notice of him, and would wait for exhaustion, discomfort and the cold night air to bring him down. Everyone went up to bed. Seen from the outside, the candlelight must have looked like golden eyes shining through the windows. What coziness, what memories of warmth must have seeped from that house so known and near, to my brother in the night chill. I leaned from the window of our room and made out his shadow bent over a hollow of the holm oak, between branch and trunk, wrapped in the blanket, and—I think—bound around with the rope to avoid falling.

The moon rose late and shone above the branches. In their nests slept the titmice, huddled up like him. The night, the open, the silence of the park were broken by rustling of leaves and distant sounds, and the wind sweeping through the trees. At times there was a far-off murmur—the sea. From my window I listened to the scattered whispering and tried to imagine it heard without the protection of the familiar background of the house, from which he was only a few yards. Alone with the night around him, clinging to the only friendly object: the rough bark of a tree, scored with innumerable little tunnels where the larvae slept.

I went to bed but did not blow out the candle. Perhaps that light at the window of his own room would keep him company. We shared a room, with two little cots in it. I looked at his, untouched, and at the darkness outside the window where he was, and turned over between the sheets feeling perhaps for the first time the pleasure of being naked, with bare feet, in a warm white bed, and seeming to sense at the same time the discomfort he must be in, tied up there in his rough blanket, his legs buttoned in his gaiters, without being able to turn around, with bones aching. It is something which has never left me since that night, the realization of my good fortune in having a bed, clean sheets, a soft mattress! And as that went through my mind, which had been fixed for so many hours and so completely on the person we all had on our minds, I dozed off and so fell asleep.





} 4 {


I DON'T know if it's true, the story they tell in books, that in ancient days a monkey could have left Rome and skipped from tree to tree till it reached Spain, without ever touching earth. The only place so thick with trees in my day was the whole length, from end to end, of the gulf of Ombrosa and its valley right up to the mountain crests; the area was famous everywhere for this.

Nowadays these parts are very different. It was after the arrival of the French that people began chopping down trees as if they were grass which is scythed every year and grows again. They have never grown again. At first we thought it was something to do with the war, with Napoleon, with the period. But the chopping went on. Now the hillsides are so bare that when we look at them, we who knew them before, it makes us feel bad.

Anyway, in those days wherever one went there were always leaves and branches between us and the sky. The only trees growing near the ground were the lemons, but even among them rose the twisted shapes of fig trees, arching their domes of heavy leaves over the orchards up toward the hills. There were the brown boughs of the cherry, the tender quince, peach, almond or young pear, the big plum, and sorb apples and carobs too, with an occasional mulberry or knobby walnut. Where the orchards ended, the olive groves began—silvery gray, a cloud tufted out halfway up the hillsides. In the background, crouching between the port below and the rock above, was the village; and there, too, the roofs were feathery with the tops of trees: plane trees, and oaks too, haughty and detached, branching out—an orderly riot—where the nobles had built their villas and walled in their parks.

Above the olives began the woods. At one time the pines must have dominated the whole area, for a few tufts still sprouted out here and there down the slopes as far as the beaches. The oaks then were thicker than they seem to me today, for they were the first, most valuable victims. Higher up, the pines gave way to chestnuts, which went on and on up the mountainsides as far as the eye could reach. This was the world of sap amid which we lived, we inhabitants of Ombrosa, almost without our noticing it.

The first to give any real thought to all this was Cosimo. He realized that as the trees were so thick he could move for several miles by passing from one branch to another, without ever needing to descend to earth. Sometimes a patch of bare ground forced him to make long detours, but he soon got to know all the necessary routes and came to measure distances by quite different estimates than ours, bearing always in mind the twisted trail he had to take over the branches. And where not even a jump would carry him on to the nearest branch, he began to use various tricks of his own. But all that I will describe later. So far we have only reached that first dawn when he woke up to find himself amid fluttering starlings on top of a holm oak, soaked in cold dew, frozen stiff, with bones aching, his legs and arms tingling, and set out happily to explore the new world.

He reached the last tree of the park, a plane tree. Below him the valley swept away under a sky of wispy clouds and smoke curling up from the slate roofs of cottages hiding behind rocks like piles of stones; the figs and cherries formed another sky, of leaves; lower down thrust out the spreading branches of plums and peaches. Everything was clear and sharp, even the grass, blade by blade, all except the soil with its crawling pumpkin leaves or dotted lettuces or fuzz of crops: it was the same on both sides of the V in which the valley opened over a high funnel of sea.

Through this landscape was rippling a kind of wave, not visible, or even audible, except now and then, but what one could hear was enough to create a sense of uneasiness; a sudden sharp cry, and then the faint crash of something falling and perhaps even the crack of a breaking branch, and more cries, different ones this time, of angry voices, converging on the place where the cry had come from before. Then nothing, a sense of nothingness, as if things were happening in a completely different part of the woods; and in fact the voices and sounds now began again but seemed to be coming from one side or another of the valley, always from where the jagged little leaves of the cherry trees were moving in the wind. And so Cosimo, with a part of his mind meandering on its own—while another part seemed to know and understand it all beforehand—found the thought crossing his mind: Cherries talk.

He began moving toward the nearest cherry tree, or row, rather, of cherry trees, tall, of superb leafy green, thick with black cherries; but my brother had not yet trained his eye to distinguish at once exactly what was and what was not on branches. He paused; the sounds of before had gone. He was on the lowest boughs, and felt all the cherries above weighing down on him; he could not have explained why, but they seemed to be converging on him, as if, in fact, he were on a tree with eyes instead of cherries.

Cosimo raised his face and an overripe cherry fell on his forehead with a plop! He strained his eyes to look up against the sun (which was growing stronger), and saw that the tree he was on and the ones nearby were full of perching little boys.

When they realized that they had been seen they were no longer silent, and called to each other in sharp though muted voices something that sounded like "Just look how he's dressed!" Then, parting the leaves in front of them, each climbed down from the branch he was on to one lower, toward the boy wearing the tricorn. They were bareheaded or in ragged straw hats, and some had their heads wrapped in sacking; they wore torn shirts and breeches; those whose feet were not bare had dirty strips of rag, and one or two of them had wooden clogs hung around their necks, taken off so as to climb better; they were the great band of fruit thieves from which Cosimo and I—in obedience to parental orders—had always kept as far away as possible. That morning, though, my brother seemed to be on the lookout for them, though with no very clear idea of what he expected from the meeting.

He stood still and waited as they climbed down toward him, throwing out, in strident whispers, remarks like "What's he think he's up to, eh?" and spitting out an occasional cherry stone at him or flinging a worm-eaten, bird-pecked cherry with a little swirl as if slinging a stone.

"Unhuh!" they exclaimed all of a sudden. They had seen the rapier dangling behind him. "D'ya see what he's got?" And they burst out laughing.

Then they stopped and stifled their laughter as if something wildly funny was about to happen; two of the little urchins had very quietly moved on to a branch right above Cosimo and were lowering the top of an open sack down over his head (one of the filthy sacks that they must have used for their booty, and which when empty they arranged over their heads and shoulders like hoods). In a short time my brother would have found himself trussed into a sack without even knowing how, then tied up like a salami so they could beat him up.

Cosimo sensed the danger, or maybe he didn't sense anything. Knowing they were jeering at his rapier, he drew it as a matter of honor. As he brandished it, the blade grazed the sack and, with a twist, tore it from the hands of the two little thieves and flung it away.

It was a good move. The others gave an "Oh!" of both disappointment and surprise, and began yelling insults in dialect at the two who had let their sack be taken.

But Cosimo had no time to congratulate himself on his success. For suddenly a new commotion burst forth, this time from the earth below; barking dogs, showers of stones and yells of "You won't get away this time, you dirty little thieves!"; and up came the tops of pitchforks. The urchins on the branches yanked up legs and elbows and hugged themselves. All that noise around Cosimo had aroused the fruitgrowers, who had been on the watch.

It was an attack prepared in force. Tired of having their fruit stolen as it ripened, many of the small landowners and tenant formers of the valley had banded together; for the only answer to the little boys' tactics of plunging into an orchard all together, sacking and stripping it, then making off in the opposite direction, was to use similar tactics themselves; that is, for all to keep watch on an orchard where the boys were bound to come sooner or later, and catch them red-handed. Now the unmuzzled dogs were baying and champing with bared teeth at the foot of the cherry trees, while hayforks were brandished in the air. Three or four of the little thieves jumped to the ground just in time to have their backs pricked by the tridents and their bottoms bitten by the dogs, and rushed off screaming and lurching down the rows of vines. No more dared go down: they stayed quivering where they were, and Cosimo too. Then the fruitgrowers began setting ladders against the trees and climbing up, preceded by points of pitchforks.

It took Cosimo some minutes to realize that there was no reason at all for him to be terrified just because the band of urchins was. And there was no reason at all for him to think that they were in the know and he wasn't. The fact that they were sitting there like idiots was proof enough; why didn't they escape on to the trees around? My brother had got there by a certain route and so could make off by the same route; he pulled his tricorn down on his head, looked around for the branch which he had used as a bridge, passed from the last cherry tree on to a carob, then dangled from the carob, dropped on to a plum tree, and so on. The others, seeing him moving on the branches as if he were at home, realized that they must follow close behind him or never find his route again, and they followed his tortuous itinerary in silence, on all fours. Meanwhile he had climbed into a fig tree, skirted a field, and swung down on a peach tree with such slender branches that the boys had to pass over it one at a time. They climbed the peach only to get a grip on the twisted trunk of an olive sprouting out of a wall; from the olive they jumped onto an oak stretching out a thick arm over the stream, and so reached the trees on the other side.

The men with pitchforks, who thought they had caught the fruit thieves at last, saw them hopping away through the air like birds. They followed, running among the barking dogs, but had to get around the thicket, then over the wall, then across the stream at a point where there was no bridge, lost time finding a ford, and saw the urchins running away in the distance.

They ran like human beings, with their feet on the ground. On the branches only my brother remained. "Where's that wagtail with the gaiters got to?" they asked each other, not seeing him ahead still. They looked up: there he was clambering about the olives. "Hey you, come down, we've shaken 'em off now!" But instead of coming down, he went leaping from bough to bough, from olive to olive, till he vanished from sight among the close-knit silvery leaves.

The band of little vagabonds, with sacks on their heads and canes in their hands, were now assaulting some cherry trees at the bottom of the valley. They were working methodically, stripping branch after branch, when, on the top of the highest tree, squatting with his legs crossed, flicking down bunches of cherries and popping them in the tricorn on his lap, who should they see but the boy with the gaiters! "Hey, how did you get here?" they asked arrogantly. But they were crestfallen because it looked as if he had flown there.

My brother was now taking the cherries one by one from his tricorn and putting them in his mouth as if they were sweets. Then he would spit out the stones with a flick of the lips, careful lest they stain his waistcoat.

"This cake-eater," said one, "what's he want from us? What's he come to bother us for? Why doesn't he go and eat the cherries in his own garden?" But they were a little abashed, because he was smarter at getting about the trees than any of them.

"Among ice-cream-eaters," said another, "a smart one does crop up now and again by mistake; take the Sinforosa for instance . . ."

At this mysterious name Cosimo pricked up his ears and, he did not know why, blushed.

"The Sinforosa betrayed us!" said another.

"But she was smart, she was, for a cake-eater herself, and this morning if she'd been there to sound her horn they wouldn't have caught us."

"Even cake-eaters can come with us, of course, if they're on our side!"

(Cosimo now understood that cake-eater meant an inhabitant of a villa, a noble, or at any rate someone of rank.)

"Listen, you," said one to him, "let's get this straight; if you want to come with us, you pick the stuff with us and you teach us all the tricks you know."

"And you let us into your father's orchards," said another. "They once shot at me there!"

Cosimo listened to them, half absorbed in his own thoughts. Then he said: "Tell me, who is the Sinforosa?"

Then all the ragamuffins scattered among the branches burst into roars and roars of laughter, so that one nearly fell off the cherry tree, and one flung himself back and held on to the branch by his legs, and another let himself dangle by his hands, shrieking with laughter all the time.

Such a row did they make that their pursuers were on their heels again. In fact they must have been right underneath, the men and the dogs, for a loud barking arose and then up came the pitchforks again. Only this time, made wary by their recent setback, they first occupied the trees around and climbed up them with ladders, and from there surrounded the band with tridents and rakes. On the ground the dogs, with all their men scattered about on trees, did not know at first where to head for and wandered around barking away with muzzles in the air. So the little thieves were able to jump quickly to the ground and run away in different directions among the confused dogs, and though one or two got a bite on a calf or a blow from a stone, most of them got away safe and sound.

On the tree remained Cosimo. "Come down!" shouted the others as they made off. "What are you doing? Sleeping? Jump down while it's clear!" But he gripped the branch with his knees and drew his rapier. From nearby trees the fruitgrowers were thrusting out pitchforks tied on sticks to reach him, and Cosimo kept them off by brandishing his sword, till one got right at his chest and pinned him to the trunk.

"Stop!" called a voice. "It's the young Baron of Piovasco! What are you doing up there, sir? How on earth did you get mixed up with that rabble?"

Cosimo recognized one of our father's laborers, Giuà della Vasca.

The pitchforks withdrew. Many of the group took off their hats. My brother also raised his tricorn with two fingers, and bowed.

"Hey, you down there, tie up the dogs!" shouted they. "Let him get down! You can come down, sir, but be careful, it's a high tree! Wait a moment, we'll put up a ladder! Then I'll take you back home!"

"No, thank you, thank you," said my brother. "Don't put yourself out, I know the way, I know the way on my own!"

He vanished behind the trunk and reappeared on another branch, twirled round the trunk and reappeared on a branch higher up, vanished behind this and then only his feet were visible on an even higher branch, as there were thick leaves above; and then the feet jumped, and nothing more was seen.

"Where's he gone to?" said the men to each other, not knowing where to look, up or down.

"There he is!" He was at the top of another tree farther away, then vanished again.

"There he is!" He was at the top of still another tree, swaying as if in the wind, and jumping.

"He's fallen! No! There he is!" All that could be seen, above the waving green, was his tricorn and queue.

"What sort of master have you got?" the others asked Giuà della Vasca. "A man or a wild animal? Or is he the devil in person?"

Giuà della Vasca was gasping. He crossed himself.

A song could be heard from Cosimo, a kind of call in solfeggio: "Oh, Sin-for-ro-saaa!"





} 5 {


THE Sinforosa—gradually Cosimo came to know a lot about this personage from the chatter of the band. It was a name they had given to a little girl, from one of the villas, who went about on a small white pony, had made friends with them and protected them for a time and even, dominating as she was, commanded them. She would ride the roads and paths on her pony, tell them when she saw ripe fruit in an unguarded orchard, then follow their attack on horseback like an officer. Around her neck she wore a hunting horn, and while they were sacking the almond and pear trees she would be galloping up and down slopes from which she could see over the whole countryside, blowing her horn as soon as she noticed any suspicious movements which might mean discovery. At the sound, the urchins would jump off the trees and hide: so while the little girl was with them they had never once been caught.

What happened afterward was more difficult to understand; the Sinforosa's "betrayal" seemed to have been twofold: partly her having invited them into her own garden to eat fruit and then getting them beaten up by her servants; and then her having made a favorite of one of them, a certain Bel-Lorè—who was still jeered at for it—and another, a certain Ugasso, at the same time, and set them against each other; and then it transpired that the urchins had been beaten by her servants, not when they were stealing fruit but after her dismissal of the two rivals, who had then united against her; there was also talk that she had often promised some cakes, but those she finally gave them were made with castor oil, so that they had tummy-aches for a week afterwards. One of these episodes or some episode like these or all these episodes together had caused a break between the Sinforosa and the band, and now they talked of her with a bitterness mingled with regret.

Cosimo listened eagerly to these stories, nodding as if every detail fitted into a picture he knew already, and finally decided to ask: "But which villa does she come from, the Sinforosa?"

"What, you mean you don't know her? You're neighbors! The Sinforosa from the Ondariva villa!"

Even without this confirmation Cosimo had felt sure that the friend of the urchins was Viola, the girl of the swing. It was—I think—because she had said she knew all the fruit thieves around, that he had first begun looking out for the band. And yet from then on the urge inside him, vague though it still was, grew sharper. At one moment he found himself longing to lead the band in a raid on the Ondariva orchards, then to offer her his services against them (after, perhaps, inciting them to molest her so as to be able to defend her), then to perform some feat of daring which would reach her ears indirectly. With all these ideas buzzing in his head he followed the band more and more distractedly; and when they left the trees and he was alone a veil of sadness would pass over his face, like a cloud over the sun.

Then he would suddenly jump up and, agile as a cat, scramble over branches and across orchards and gardens, humming some tense little song between his teeth, his eyes set as if seeing nothing, balancing by instinct just like a cat.

We saw him go by various times, in an absolute daze, over the branches of our garden. "There he is!" we would suddenly shout, for whatever we did he was still in the forefront of our minds, and we used to count the hours and days he had been up on the trees, and our father would say, "He's mad! He has a devil in him!" and then attack the Abbé Fauchelefleur: "The only thing is to exorcise him! What are you waiting for, you. Now I ask you, mon abbé, what are you doing there with your hands crossed? He's got the devil in him, my own son, you understand, sacré nom de Dieu!"

The word "devil" seemed to wake a precise chain of thought in the Abbé's mind; he shook himself out of his lethargy all of a sudden and launched into a most complicated theological discourse on how the presence of the devil should be properly understood, from which it was not clear if he was contradicting my father or just generalizing. He would make no pronouncement, in fact, on whether a relationship between the devil and my brother was to be considered possible or excluded a priori.

The Baron became impatient, the Abbé lost the thread, I was already bored. With our mother, on the other hand, the state of maternal anxiety, of fluid emotion, had consolidated, as every emotion tended to with her, into practical decisions and a search for concrete ways and means, as the preoccupations of a general should. She had found a field telescope, a long one, with a tripod; she would put her eye to it and so spend hours on the terrace of the villa continually regulating the lenses to keep the boy in focus among the leaves, even when we could have sworn he was out of range.

"Can you still see him?" our father would ask from the garden, where he was pacing up and down under the trees without ever succeeding in laying eyes on Cosimo, except when the boy was right above his head. The Generalessa would signal down that she could, and that we mustn't disturb her, as if she were following troops' movements from a hill. Sometimes she obviously did not see him at all, but she had got a fixed idea, I don't know how, that he must appear in a given place and not elsewhere, and there she kept her telescope trained. Every now and again she must have admitted to herself that she had made a mistake; and then she would look away from the eyepiece and begin to examine a surveyor's map which she held open on her knees, with one hand to her mouth in a thoughtful attitude and another following the hieroglyphics on the map, until she had decided on the spot which her son must have reached, plotted the angles, and pointed her telescope on some treetop in that leafy sea, slowly moving the lenses into focus; and then from the gentle little smile on her lips we would know she had seen him, that he was really there!

Next, she would take up some colored flags which she had on a stool, and wave one and then the other in decisive, rhythmic movements, like signals. (This slightly annoyed me as I did not know that our mother had those flags and knew how to manage them, and I thought how lovely it would have been if she had taught us to play at flag-signaling before, when we were both small; but our mother never played and now it was too late.)

I must say, though, that in spite of all her tools of war, she remained a mother, with her heart in her mouth, and her handkerchief screwed in her hand. One would have thought that she found acting the general a relief, or that working off her apprehensions as a general rather than a simple mother soothed her distress, for she was a fragile woman, whose sole defense was that military style inherited from her Von Kurtewitz forebears.

There she was, waving one of her flags and looking through her telescope, when suddenly her face lit up and she laughed. We realized that Cosimo had answered. How I don't know, by a wave of the hat perhaps, or by a wave of the tip of a bough. Certainly from that moment our mother changed; she lost her apprehensions, and if her destiny as a mother was different from others, with a son so strange and lost to normal affections, she came to accept this strangeness of Cosimo's before any of the rest of us, as if placated by those greetings which from then onwards he would send her unexpectedly every now and again, by this silent exchange.

The strange thing was that our mother never deluded herself that Cosimo, now he had sent her a greeting, was thinking of ending his escape and returning among us. Our father, on the other hand, lived perpetually in this hope and at the slightest news about Cosimo would repeat: "Ah yes? You've seen him? He's coming back?" But our mother, the most removed from Cosimo in a way, seemed the only one who managed to accept him as he was, perhaps because she did not try to give herself any explanation.

But let us return to that day. Peeping from behind our mother's skirts now appeared Battista, who very rarely went outside; holding up a plate with some strange pap in it and raising a spoon she cooed: "Cosimo . . . D'you want any?" But she got a slap from our father and went back indoors. Who knows what monstrous mishmash she had prepared! Our brother had vanished.

I yearned to follow him—above all, now that I knew he was taking part in the escapades of the band of little ruffians—and to me he seemed to have opened the doors of a new kingdom, one to be looked at no longer with alarm and mistrust but with shared enthusiasm. I was constantly running back and forth between the terrace and a high dormer window from which I could look over the treetops; and from there, more with the ear than the eye, I would follow the scamperings of the band through the orchards, watch the tops of the cherry trees quiver, and every now and again a hand appear plucking and picking, a tousled or hooded head, and among the voices hear Cosimo's and ask myself: "But how on earth did you get over there? You were in the park just a moment ago. Are you quicker than a squirrel?"

They were on the red plum trees above the Upper Pool, I remember, when they heard the horn. I heard it too but took no notice, not knowing what it was. But they did! My brother told me that they stood rooted to the spot, and in their astonishment at hearing the horn again seemed to forget it was a signal of alarm: they just asked each other if they'd heard aright, if it was the Sinforosa again, riding around on her pony to warn them of danger. Suddenly they scattered from the orchard, not in a rush to escape, but to look for her and reach her.

Only Cosimo remained, his face red as fire. But as soon as he saw the urchins running and realized they were running to her, he began to leap from branch to branch himself, risking his neck at every move.

Viola was on a curving slope of the lane, sitting still, one hand with the reins on the pony's crupper, the other brandishing a riding crop. As she looked down on the little boys she brought the tip of the crop to her mouth and began chewing it. Her dress was blue, the horn gilt and hanging on her neck by a chain. The boys had all stopped together and were also chewing, at plums or fingers or scabs on their hands and arms, or comers of sacking. And slowly from their chewing mouths, as if overcoming some inner disquiet and not from any real feeling, almost as if wanting to be contradicted, they began to mouth phrases under their breath, in rhythm, like a song: "What have you . . . come to do . . . Sinforosa . . . back you go . . . now you are. . . our friend no more. . . ah, ah, ah . . . ah, betrayer."

Above, the branches burst apart and there, in a high fig tree appeared the head of Cosimo, panting, surrounded by leaves. From down below, with that crop in her hand, she swept him and the others with the same look. Cosimo could not contain himself; still with his tongue out, he yelled: "D'you know I've never been down from the trees since then?"

Undertakings such as these should be kept quiet and mysterious; once declared or boasted about they are apt to seem pointless and even petty. So my brother had scarcely pronounced those words when he wished he had not said them; it did not seem to matter any more, and he even found himself wanting to come down and have done with the whole business. All the more when Viola slowly took her crop out of her mouth and said, softly: "Haven't you now? You clever little thing!"

From the flea-ridden urchins came rumbles of laughter, then their mouths opened and they broke into roars and screams till their bellies ached, and Cosimo went into such a paroxysm of rage on the fig tree that the brittle wood gave way, and a branch cracked under his feet. Cosimo fell like a stone.

He fell with his arms outstretched, making no effort to stop himself. That was the only time, to tell the truth, during his whole life in the trees of this world, that he had neither will nor instinct to grip hold of something. But a comer of his coat caught and impaled him on a low branch; Cosimo found himself hanging in the air with his head down, a foot or so from the ground.

The blood in his head came from the same force which was making him blush scarlet. And his first thought on looking up and seeing the screaming boys (upside down), who were now seized by a general frenzy of somersaulting in which one by one they appeared right side up as if gripping the ground above an abyss, and the little blond girl galloping up and down on her prancing pony—his one thought was that it was the first time he had ever actually spoken of being on the trees and that it would also be the last.

With a jerk he drew himself back on to the branch and got astride it. Viola had now calmed down her pony and did not seem to have noticed what had been happening. Cosimo immediately forgot his confusion. The girl brought the horn to her lips and blew the deep call of alarm. At the sound, the urchins (who—as Cosimo commented later—seemed to be sent by Viola's presence into a wild state of agitation, like hares under a full moon) went rushing off in flight. They let themselves be drawn off like that, as if by instinct, though realizing she had done it as a joke, running down the slope imitating the call of the horn with her galloping in front on her short-legged pony.

They were blundering along so blindly that every now and again they found her no longer ahead. Eventually she shook them off by galloping away from the path. Where was she going? She galloped along through the olive groves, down to the valley which sloped gradually. She looked for the tree on which Cosimo was perched at that moment, galloped right around it, and was off again. A moment later there she was at the foot of another olive, with my brother's head appearing above the leaves. And so, in lines as twisted as the branches of the olives themselves, down the valley they went together.

When the little thieves noticed them, and saw how they both were linked from branch to saddle, they all began whistling together, a spiteful whistle of derision; and whistling louder and louder, went off toward Porta Capperi, one of the gates of the town.

The girl and my brother remained alone, chasing each other among the olives, but Cosimo was disappointed to notice that when the rabble vanished Viola's enjoyment of the game seemed to fade and boredom to set in. The suspicion came to him that she was doing all this on purpose to anger the others, and at the same time the hope came that she would continue even if only to anger him; certainly she seemed to need the anger of others in order to make herself feel more precious. (All things scarcely more than sensed by the boy Cosimo then; in reality I imagine he was scrambling over the rough barks without any true understanding, like a fool.)

Suddenly, round a bluff they were assailed by a sharp little hail of gravel. The girl put her head down behind the pony's neck for protection and made off; my brother, in full view, up on the turn of a branch, remained under fire. But the little stones reached him too glancingly up there to hurt much, except for one or two on the forehead and ears. The little ruffians whistled and laughed, shouting: "Sin-fo-ro-sa is a bitch," as they ran away.

The fruit thieves reached Porta Capperi, with its green cascades of caper plants down the walls. From the hovels around came the shouts of mothers. But the mothers yelled at their children because they had come home to supper instead of scavenging for food somewhere else. Around Porta Capped, in huts and thatched houses, broken-down carts and tents, were huddled the poorest folk of Ombrosa, so poor that they were kept outside the town gates and away from the fields, people who had drifted there from distant places whence they had been thrust by the famine and poverty which were on the increase in every state. It was dusk, and disheveled women with babies at their breasts were fanning smoky stoves; beggars lying in the open were bandaging their sores, and others were playing at dice, shouting raucously. The gang of urchins now added to the uproar and greasy smoke their own rioting, got slapped by their mothers and had fist fights among themselves in the dust. And already their rags had taken on the color of all the other rags, and their birdlike gaiety was muted into that dense rubbish heap of humanity. So, at the appearance of the fair girl at a gallop and Cosimo on the trees nearby, they just raised intimidated eyes, then slunk off and tried to lose themselves amid the dust and fire smoke, as if a wall had suddenly sprung up between them.

For the two of them, all this was just a moment, a glance. Then Viola left the smoke from the shacks mingling with the evening shadows and the cries of women and children behind her, to gallop among the pines on the beach.

Beyond was the sea. A faint clatter of stones. It was dark. The clatter became a hammer: the pony raced along striking sparks against the pebbles. From the low twisted branches of a pine tree my brother looked at the clear-cut shadow of the fair girl cross the beach. From the black sea rose a wave with a faint crest—it curled higher, advanced all white, broke and grazed the shadow of the horse and girl racing at full speed; Cosimo on the pine tree found his face wet with salty spray.





} 6 {


THOSE first days of Cosimo's on the trees were without aim or purpose, and were dominated entirely by the desire to know and possess his new kingdom. He would have liked to explore it to its extreme limits, to study all the possibilities it offered him, to discover it plant by plant and branch by branch. I say he would have liked to, but in fact we found him continually reappearing above our heads, with the busy quick movements of a wild animal which always seems, even when squatting and still, to be on the point of jumping away.

Why did he return to our park? Seeing him twisting about on a plane tree or an ilex within the range of our mother's telescope, one would have said that the impulse urging him, his dominating passion, was always to scare us off, make us worried or angry. (I say us, because I had not yet managed to understand how his mind was working; when he needed something, the alliance with me could never, it seemed, be put in doubt; at other times he went over my head as if he had not even seen me.)

But really, he was only passing us by. It was the wall by the magnolia tree which attracted him. It was there that we saw him vanish again and again, even when the fair girl could not have been up or when that host of governesses and aunts had made her go to bed. In the Ondariva gardens the branches spread out like the tentacles of extraordinary animals, and the plants on the ground opened up stars of fretted leaves like the green skins of reptiles, and waved feathery yellow bamboos with a rustle like paper. From the highest tree Cosimo, in his yearning to enjoy to the utmost the unusual greens of this exotic flora and its different lights and different silence, would let his head drop upside down, so that the garden became a forest, a forest not of this earth but a new world in itself.

Then Viola appeared. Cosimo would see her suddenly giving herself a push on the swing, or in the saddle of the pony, or hear from the end of the garden the deep note of the hunting horn.

The Marchese and Marchesa of Ondariva had never really worried about their daughter's wanderings. When she was about on foot, she had all her aunts following behind; as soon as she mounted the pony she was free as air, for the aunts did not go out riding and could not see where she went. And her intimacy with those urchins was too inconceivable even to cross their minds. But they had immediately noticed the little Baron clambering about the branches and were on the lookout for him, though with a certain air of superior contempt.

Our father, on the other hand, linked his bitterness at Cosimo's disobedience to his aversion for the Ondarivas, almost as if wanting to blame them, as if it were they who were attracting his son into their garden, entertaining him, and encouraging him in that rebellious game of his. Suddenly he decided to organize a roundup to capture Cosimo, not on our land, but while actually in the Ondariva gardens. Almost as if to underline his aggressive intentions toward our neighbors, he decided not to lead the roundup himself (this would have meant presenting himself personally to the Ondarivas and asking them to restore his son—which, however unjustified, would have been a dignified link between noblemen), but to send a squad of servants under the command of the Cavalier Enea Silvio Carrega.

Armed with ladders and ropes they went to the gates of the Ondariva villa. The Cavalier fluttered about in robe and fez, excusing himself and asking if they could enter. At first the Ondariva servants thought that ours had come to cut some trailing branches which grew over into their garden; then, at the Cavalier's confused phrases—"We want to catch . . . to catch . . ." pacing to and fro and looking up among the branches—they asked, "But what have you lost, a parrot?"

"The son, the eldest son, the heir," said the Cavalier hurriedly, putting a ladder against an Indian chestnut and beginning to climb up it himself. Among the branches was Cosimo, dangling his legs with a carefree air. Viola, just as carefree, was bowling a hoop along the paths. The servants offered the Cavalier ropes with which to capture my brother; how, none of them exactly knew. But Cosimo, before the Cavalier had got halfway up the ladder, was already on top of another tree. The Cavalier had the ladder moved, and the same thing happened four or five times, each time with the Cavalier trampling on a flower bed and Cosimo passing in a couple of jumps on to a nearby tree. Suddenly Viola was surrounded by aunts and governesses, then led into the house and shut in, so as not to see all the commotion. Cosimo broke off a branch, brandished it in both hands and swished it in the air.

"But why can't you go into your own wide park to conduct this hunt, my dear sirs?" asked the Marchese of Ondariva, appearing solemnly on the flight of steps from the villa, in dressing gown and skullcap, which made him look strangely like the Cavalier. "I ask the whole family of Piovasco di Rondò!" And he made a wide circular gesture which embraced the young Baron on the tree, his illegitimate uncle, our servants, and everything of ours beyond the wall.

At this point Enea Silvio Carrega changed his tune. He trotted up to the Marchese and, fluttering about as if nothing was happening, began to talk to him about the fountains in the basin nearby and how he had got the idea of a much higher and more effective jet which would also serve, by changing a rosette, to water the lawns. This was a new proof of our illegitimate uncle's unpredictable and deceptive nature; he had been sent there by the Baron with a definite mandate, and with orders to treat the neighbors firmly; why, then, start a friendly chat with the Marchese as if wanting to ingratiate himself? The Cavalier only seemed to have talent as a conversationalist when it happened to suit him, and just at the very moment people were counting on his unfriendly character. The extraordinary thing was that the Marchese listened to him, began asking him questions and eventually took him off to examine all the fountains and jets. Both of them were dressed the same, both in long robes, both so much the same height that they might have been mistaken for each other. Behind them walked all our servants and theirs, some carrying ladders, which they did not know what to do with now.

Meanwhile Cosimo was climbing undisturbed on to the trees near the windows of the villa, trying to find beyond the curtains the room in which Viola had been shut. He discovered it, finally, and threw a berry against the pane.

The window opened and the face of the little blond girl appeared.

"It's all your fault I am locked in here," she said, and shut the window again, pulling the curtain.

Suddenly Cosimo felt desperate.

When my brother was taken by one of his wild moods, it really was something to worry about. We saw him running (if the word running makes any sense when referring not to the earth's surface but to a world of irregular supports at different heights, with empty air between) and any moment it seemed he might lose his footing and fall, which never happened. He jumped, moved into rapid little steps on a sloping branch, leaned over and suddenly swung on to a higher branch, and in four or five of these precarious zigzags vanished from sight.

Where did he go? That time he ran and ran, from ilex to olive to beech, till he was in the wood. There he paused, panting. Under him spread a meadow. A slight breeze was moving in a wave over the thick tufts of grass, with subtle shades of green. Over it flew the fluffy little white tufts of dandelions which had gone to seed. In the middle stood an isolated pine tree, unreachable, with oblong cones. Tree creepers, swift little birds with stippled brown wings, were perching on the thick clusters of pine needles, askew on the ends, some with their tails up and their beaks down, pecking at worms and pine nuts.

That wish to enter into an elusive element which had urged my brother into the trees, was still now working inside him unsatisfied, making him long for a more intimate link, a relationship which would bind him to each leaf and twig and feather and flutter. It was the love which the hunter has for living things, and which he can only express by aiming his gun at them; Cosimo could not yet recognize it and was trying to satisfy it by probing deeper.

The wood was thick and impenetrable. Cosimo had to open his way through by hacking with his rapier, and gradually he forgot his fixation, all taken up as he was by the practical problems to be faced one by one, and by a fear (which he did not want to recognize though it was there) of drawing too far away from familiar places. So, clearing his way on through the thick greenery, he reached a point where he saw two yellow eyes fixed on him between the leaves right ahead. Cosimo brought up his rapier, moved a branch aside and let it fall slowly back into place. Then he heaved a sigh of relief, and laughed at the fear he had felt; he had seen who those yellow eyes belonged to, a cat.

But the sight of the cat, just glimpsed in moving the branch, stuck in his mind, and a moment later Cosimo found himself trembling with fear again. For that cat, outwardly in every way the same as every other cat, was a terrible and terrifying cat; enough to make one scream just to look at it. It was difficult to say exactly what was so terrifying about it. The cat was a kind of tabby, bigger than any other tabby, but that did not mean anything; it was terrible, with its straight whiskers like hedgehogs' quills, with breath which one could almost see rather than hear, coming from between a double row of teeth sharp as claws. Its ears were sharply pointed pennants, covered with deceptively soft hair; the fur, standing on end, swelled around the neck in a yellow ring and stripes quivered over its flanks as if it were being stroked. The cat's neck was in a position so unnatural it seemed impossible to hold. All this that Cosimo had caught sight of in the second before he dropped the branch back to its proper place was in addition to what he had not had time to see but could imagine: the great tufts of hair around the paws masking the tearing strength of the claws, ready to spring at him. He could still see between the leaves the yellow irises with the rolling black pupils fixed on him. He could still hear the hoarse breathing growing heavier and hoarser. It all made him realize that he was face to face with the most savage wild cat in the woods.

All the twitter and flutter of the woods were silent. And then it leaped, the wild cat, but not at the boy, an almost vertical leap which astounded more than terrified Cosimo. The terror came afterwards, at seeing the animal on a branch right above his head. It was there, crouching, he could see the belly with its long whitish fur, the tense paws with their claws in the wood, the arched back. "Fff . . . fff . . ." it was hissing, ready to drop right on him. Cosimo, with a quick maneuver that was purely instinctive, moved on to a lower branch. "Fff . . . fff . . ." hissed the wild cat, and at each of the Fff's it jumped to one side and another, and was on a branch above Cosimo again. My brother repeated his maneuver, but found himself astride the lowest branch of the tree. The jump to the ground beneath was of some distance, but not so great that he would not have preferred to jump down rather than wait to see what the animal would do as soon as it had stopped making that torturing sound somewhere between a wheeze and a growl.

Cosimo was at the very point of jumping to the ground, but two instincts in him clashed—the natural one to save himself and the stubborn one never to leave the trees at any cost—and he tightened his legs and knees on the branch. The cat thought now, with the boy wavering, was the moment to spring; it came down at him with fur on end, claws out, and that wheeze. Cosimo could think of nothing better than to shut his eyes and bring up his rapier, a stupid move which the cat could easily evade. Then it was on him. A claw dug into Cosimo's cheek, but he, instead of falling, clinging as he was to the branch by the knees, swung out along the branch. This was quite the opposite of what the cat, who found itself thrown off balance and falling, was expecting. It tried to save itself by plunging its claws into the branch, and to do so had to twist around in the air—an instant, but enough for Cosimo, in a sudden victorious thrust, to plunge his rapier deep into its belly.

He was saved, covered with blood, the wild beast stuck on his rapier as on a spit, and a cheek torn from under his eye to his chin in a triple slash. He was screaming with pain and victory and frenziedly clinging to the branch, to the rapier, to the body of the cat, in that desperate moment that comes to one who wins for the first time and realizes the agony of victory, realizes too that now he is bound to continue on the road he has chosen and will not be granted any evasion through failure.

So I saw him arriving over the trees, covered with blood down to his waistcoat, his queue in disorder under the battered tricorn, holding by the neck that dead wild cat which now seemed just like any other cat.

I ran to the Generalessa on the terrace. "Lady Mother," I shouted, "he's wounded!"

"Was? Wounded? How?" She was already pointing her telescope.

"Wounded so he looks wounded!" I exclaimed, and the Generalessa seemed to understand my definition, for following him with the telescope as he came jumping on quicker than ever, she said: "Es ist wahr."

At once she began to prepare lint and bandages and balsams as if for the ambulance of a battalion, and handed them all over for me to take to him, without its even occurring to her that he might decide to return home for doctoring. I ran into the park with the parcel of bandages and stood waiting under the last mulberry tree by the wall of the Ondarivas, for he had already vanished in the magnolia.

He made a triumphant appearance in the Ondariva garden with the dead animal in his hands. And what should he see in the space in front of the villa? A coach ready to leave, with servants loading bags on the luggage rack, and, amid a cluster of severe, black-robed governesses and aunts, Viola in traveling dress embracing the Marchese and Marchesa.

"Viola!" he shouted, raising the cat by its neck. "Where are you going?"

All the people around the coach raised their eyes to the branches, and at the sight of him, lacerated, bleeding, with that mad air and that dead animal in his hands, began making gestures of disgust: "Ici de nouveau! Et arrangé de cette façon." And as if swept by a sudden gust of rage all the aunts began to push the girl toward the coach.

Viola turned around, her nose in the air and an expression of contempt and boredom which might have been meant for Cosimo as well as her relations, gave a quick glance at the trees (surely in reply to his question), said: "They're sending me to school!" and turned around to get into the coach. She had not deigned to look either at him or his trophy.

The carriage door was already shut, the coachman was on the box, and Cosimo, still unable to take in this departure, was trying to attract her attention and make her understand that he had dedicated that bloodthirsty victory to her, but could only explain by shouting: "I've killed a cat!"

The whip gave a crack, the coach started off amid waving of handkerchiefs by the aunts, and from the door came: "How clever of you!" from Viola, whether of enthusiasm or denigration was not clear.

This was their farewell. And in Cosimo, tension, pain from his wounds, disappointment at not getting any glory from his victory, despair at that sudden departure, all surged up in him and he broke into violent sobs, shrieking and screaming and tearing at the twigs.

"Hors d'ici! Hors d'ici! Poisson sauvage! Hors de notre jardin!" shrieked the aunts, and all the Ondariva servants came running up with long sticks and threw stones to drive him away.

Still sobbing and screaming, Cosimo flung the dead cat in the faces of the people below. The servants took the animal by its neck and flung it onto a dunghill.

When I heard that our little neighbor had left, I hoped for a time that Cosimo might come down. I don't know why, but I linked with her, or with her also, my brother's decision to stay up in the trees.

But he did not even mention it. I climbed up to take him bandages and lint, and he himself tended the scratches on his face and arms. Then he asked for a fishing rod with a hook. He used it to fish up the dead cat from an olive tree over the Ondariva's compost pile. He skinned it, cured the fur as best he could, and made a cap of it. It was the first of the fur caps which we were to see him wear his whole life through.





} 7 {


THE last attempt to capture Cosimo was made by our sister Battista. It was her initiative, of course, done without consulting anyone, in secret, as she always did things. She went out at night, with a pailful of glue and a rope ladder, and daubed a carob tree with glue from top to bottom. It was a tree on which Cosimo used to perch every morning.

In the morning, stuck to the carob tree were goldfinches beating their wings, wrens all wrapped in a sticky mess, night butterflies, leaves borne by the wind, a squirrel's tail, and also the tail torn off Cosimo's coat. Who knows if he had sat on a branch and managed to free himself, or if instead—more probably, as I had not seen him wear the jacket for some time—he put that piece of rag there on purpose to pull our legs. Anyway, the tree remained hideously covered with glue and then dried up.

All of us, even our father, began to be convinced that Cosimo would never return. Since my brother had been hopping about on trees all over Ombrosa, the Baron had not dared show himself in public, for fear the ducal dignity might be compromised. Every day he became gaunter and paler, how much due to paternal anxiety and how much to dynastic worries I do not know; but the two were now fused, for Cosimo was his eldest son, the heir to the title, and if it is difficult to imagine a baron hopping about on trees like a bird, it seems still more unsuitable for a duke, even though a boy, and this conduct of the heir was certainly no support for the contested title.

They were useless preoccupations, of course, for the people of Ombrosa just laughed at our father's pomposity; and the nobles living nearby thought him mad. By now these nobles had taken to living in pleasantly sited villas rather than in their feudal castles, and this already tended to make them behave more like private citizens, avoiding unnecessary bothers. Who gave a thought any more to the ancient Dukedom of Ombrosa? The strange thing about Ombrosa was that it was no one's and yet everyone's, with certain rights to the Ondarivas—lords of almost all the land there—but a free commune for some time, tributary of the Republic of Genoa; we did not have to worry about our inherited lands and about others we had bought for nothing from the commune at a moment when it was heavily in debt. What more could anyone ask? There was a small circle of nobles living in that area, with villas and parks down to the sea. All of them lived a pleasant life visiting each other and hunting. Life cost little. They had certain advantages over those who were at court, having none of the worries, duties and expenses of nobles with a royal family, capital, or politics to beware of. But feeling himself a dethroned potentate, our father did not enjoy this life at all. He had eventually broken off all relations with the nobles of the neighborhood (our mother, being a foreigner, had never had any at all, one could say). This had its advantages, as by seeing no one, we both saved money and hid the penury of our finances.

Not that we had better relations with the common people of Ombrosa—you know what they are like: rather crude, thinking of nothing but business. At that period, with the drinking of sugared lemonade spreading among the richer classes, lemons were beginning to sell well; and they had planted lemon groves everywhere and rebuilt the port ruined by the invasions of pirates many years before. Situated between the Republic of Genoa, the fiefs of the King of Sardinia, the Kingdom of France and episcopal lands, they trafficked with all and worried about none, except for tributes owed to Genoa, which made them sweat every time they fell due and caused riots every year against the tax collectors of the Republic.

When these disturbances about taxes broke out, the Baron of Rondò always imagined that he might be approached with an offer of the ducal coronet. He would appear in the piazza, and offer himself to the people of Ombrosa as their protector, but each time he had to make a quick getaway under a hail of rotten lemons. Then he would say that a conspiracy had been formed against him; by the Jesuits, as usual. For he had got it into his head that there was a life-and-death struggle between him and the Jesuits, and that the Society thought of nothing but plotting his ruin. In fact there had been some difference of opinion between them about the ownership of an orchard which was being fought over by our family and the Society of Jesus; after some tension the Baron, being then on good terms with the Bishop, had managed to get the Father Provincial removed from the diocese. Since that time our father was certain that the Society was sending agents to make attempts on his life and rights; he on his part tried to enroll a militia of faithful to liberate the Bishop, whom he considered had fallen prisoner of the Jesuits; and he offered asylum and protection to anyone who declared himself persecuted by the Jesuits, which was why he had chosen as our spiritual father that semi-Jansenist with his head in the clouds.

There was only one person our father trusted, and that was the Cavalier. The Baron had a weakness for this illegitimate brother of his, as if he were an only son in misfortune; and I don't know if we realized it, but there must certainly have been, in our attitude toward the Cavalier Carrega, a touch of jealousy at our father being fonder of that fifty-year-old brother of his than of either of us boys. Anyway, we were not the only ones to look at him askance; the Generalessa and Battista pretended to respect him but really could not bear him; under that subdued exterior he did not care a fig for any of us, and may have hated us all, even the Baron to whom he owed so much. The Cavalier spoke so little that at certain times he might have been thought either deaf and dumb or incapable of understanding our language; I don't know how he had managed once to practice as a lawyer, and if he had been so absent-minded before his time with the Turks. Perhaps he had also been a person of intellect, if he had learned from the Turks all those calculations of hydraulics, the only job he was now capable of applying himself to, exaggeratedly praised by my father. I never knew much about his past, nor who his mother had been, nor what his relations had been in youth with our grandfather (who must surely have been fond of him too, as he had made him into a lawyer and granted him the title of Cavalier), nor how he had ended up in Turkey. It was not even certain if it was in Turkey itself that he had spent so much time, or in some Berber state such as Tunis or Algiers; anyway it was a Mohammedan country, and it was said that he had become a Mohammedan too. So many things were said of him: that he had held important appointments, been a high dignitary of the Sultan, Hydraulic Advisor to the Divan, or something of the kind, before falling into disgrace due to a palace plot or a woman's jealousy or a gambling debt, and been sold as a slave. It was known that he was found in chains rowing with the slaves in an Ottoman galley captured by the Venetians, who freed him. In Venice he had lived more or less as a beggar until he had got into some other trouble, a fight, I think (though who he could fight with, a man so timid, heaven only knows) and ended in prison again. He was ransomed by our father through the good offices of the Republic of Genoa, and returned to us, a little bald man with a black beard, very frightened, half dumb (I was a child but the scene that evening left an impression on my mind), decked out in clothes that were far too big for him. Our father imposed him on everyone as a person in authority, named him administrator, and allotted him a study, which was filled more and more with disordered papers. The Cavalier wore a long robe and a skullcap in the shape of a fez, as did many nobles and bourgeois in their studies, in those days; only he was, to tell the truth, very rarely in his study, and was seen going around dressed like that outside in the country too. Eventually he also appeared at table in those Turkish robes, and the strange thing was that our father, usually such a stickler for rules, seemed to tolerate it.

In spite of his duties as administrator, the Cavalier scarcely ever exchanged a word with bailiffs or tenants or peasants, due to his timidity and inarticulateness; and all the practical cares, giving of orders, keeping people up to scratch, in fact fell on our father. Enea Silvio Carrega kept the account books, and I do not know if our affairs were going so badly because of the way in which he kept them, or if his accounts went so badly because of our affairs. He would also make calculations and drawings of irrigation schemes, and fill a big blackboard with lines and figures, and words in Turkish writing. Every now and again our father shut himself up in the study with him for hours (they were the longest periods the Cavalier ever spent there) and after a short time the angry voice of the Baron, and the loud sounds of a quarrel, would come from behind the closed door, but the voice of the Cavalier could scarcely ever be heard. Then the door would open and the Cavalier would appear wrapped in the folds of his robe, with the skullcap stuck on the top of his head, go toward a French window with his quick little steps and out into the park and garden. "Enea Silvio! Enea Silvio!" shouted our father, running behind, but his half brother was already between the rows of vines, or among the lemon groves, and all that could be seen was the red fez moving stubbornly among the leaves. Our father would follow, calling; after a little we saw them returning, the Baron always talking and waving his arms, and the little Cavalier hobbling along beside him, his fists clenched in the pockets of his robe.





} 8 {


IN THOSE days Cosimo often challenged men on the ground to compete in aiming or skill, partly to try out his own capacities and discover just what he could manage to do up there on the treetops. The urchins he challenged to quoits. One day they were among the shacks of the vagabonds and down-and-outs near Porta Capped, with Cosimo playing quoits with them from a dried and leafless ilex tree, when he saw a horseman approaching. It was a tall, rather bowed man, wrapped in a black cloak. He recognized his father. The rabble dispersed, while the women stood looking on from the thresholds of their shacks.

The Baron Arminio rode right up under the tree. The sunset was red. Cosimo stood among bare branches. They looked straight at each other. It was the first time since the dinner of the snails that they found themselves like that, face to face. Many days had passed, things had changed. Both of them knew that the snails did not enter into it now; nor did the obedience of sons or the authority of fathers; that all the many logical and sensible things which could be said would be out of place; yet they had to say something.

"You're making a spectacle of yourself!" began the father, bitterly. "Really worthy of a gentleman!" (He called him by the formal "voi," as he did for the most serious reprimands, but the use of the word now had a sense of distance, of detachment.)

"A gentleman, my Lord Father, is such whether he is on earth or on the treetops," replied Cosimo, and at once added: "If he behaves with decency."

"An excellent maxim," admitted the Baron gravely. "And yet only a short time ago you were stealing plums from one of our tenants."

It was true. My brother had been found out. What was he to reply? He smiled—but not haughtily or cynically—a shy smile, and blushed.

The father smiled too, a melancholy smile, and for some reason or other blushed too.

"You're making common cause with the worst little ruffians in the area!" he said then.

"No, my Lord Father, I'm on my own, and each acts for himself," said Cosimo firmly.

"I ask you to come down to earth," said the Baron in a calm, rather faint voice, "and to take up the duties of your station!"

"I have no intention of obeying you, my Lord Father," said Cosimo. "I am very sorry."

They were ill at ease, both of them, bored. Each knew what the other would say. "And what about your studies? Your devotions as a Christian?" said the father. "Do you intend to grow up like an American savage?"

Cosimo was silent. These were thoughts he had not yet put to himself and had no wish to. Then he exclaimed: "Just because I'm a few yards higher up, does it mean that good teaching can't reach me?"

This was an able reply too, though it diminished, in a way, the range of his gesture; a sign of weakness.

His father realized this and became more pressing. "Rebellion cannot be measured by yards," said he. "Even when a journey seems no distance at all, it can have no return."

Now was the moment for my brother to produce some other noble reply, perhaps a Latin maxim, but at that instant none came into his head, though he knew so many by heart. Instead he suddenly got bored with all this solemnity, and shouted: "But from the trees I can piss farther," a phrase without much meaning, but which cut the discussion short.

As though they had heard the phrase, a shout went up from the ragamuffins around Porta Capped. The Baron of Rondò's horse shied, the Baron pulled the reins and wrapped himself more tightly in his cloak, ready to leave. Then he turned, drew an arm out of his cloak, pointed to the sky, which had suddenly become overcast with black clouds, and exclaimed: "Be careful, son, there's Someone who can piss on us all!" and spurred his horse on.

The rain, long awaited in the countryside, began to fall in big scattered drops. Among the hovels there was a scattering and running of urchins hooded in sacks and singing in dialect: "It's raining! It's raining! No more complaining." Cosimo vanished through leaves drooping with water, which poured showers on his head at a touch.

As soon as I realized it was raining, I began to worry about him. I imagined him soaking wet, cowering against a tree trunk without ever managing to avoid the oblique rain. And I knew that a storm would not make him return. So I hurried off to our mother. "It's raining! What will Cosimo do, Lady Mother?"

The Generalessa shook the curtain and looked out at the rain. She was calm. "The worst nuisance from heavy rain is the mud. Up there he's away from that."

"But will he find enough shelter in the trees?"

"He'll withdraw to his tents."

"Which, Lady Mother?"

"He'll have had the foresight to prepare them in time."

"But don't you think I'd better go find him and give him an umbrella?"

As if the word "umbrella" had suddenly torn her from her observation post and flung her back into maternal preoccupations, the Generalessa began saying: "Ja, ganz gewiss! And a bottle of apple syrup, well heated, wrapped in a woolen sock! And some oilcloth, to stretch over the branches and stop the wet coming through . . . But where'll he be now, poor boy! . . . Let's hope you manage to find him . . ."

Loaded with parcels I went out into the rain, under an enormous green umbrella, holding under my arm another umbrella, shut, for Cosimo.

I gave our particular whistle but the only answer was the endless patter of the rain on the trees. It was dark; once outside the garden precincts I did not know my way and put my feet haphazardly on slippery stones, spongy grass, puddles, whistling all the time and tipping the umbrella back to send the whistle upwards, so that the rain lashed my face and washed the whistle from my lips. My idea was to go toward some public lands full of tall trees where I thought he might possibly have taken refuge, but in that darkness I got lost and stood there clutching the umbrellas and packages, with only the bottle of syrup, wrapped in its woolen sock, to give me a little warmth.

Then, among the trees, high in the darkness above, I saw a light which could not be coming from either moon or stars. And at my whistle I seemed to hear his in reply.

"Cosimooo!"

"Biagiooo!" came a voice through the rain from the treetops.

"Where are you?"

"Here. . . I'm coming toward you, but hurry up as I'm getting wet!"

We found each other. Wrapped in a blanket, he came down onto the low fork of a willow to show me how to climb up. through complicated interlacing branches, as far as a beech tree with a high trunk, from which came that light. I gave him the umbrella and some of the parcels at once, and we tried to struggle up with the umbrellas open, but it was impossible and we got wet all the same. Finally I reached the place he was leading me to; but I saw nothing except for a faint light that seemed to be coming from the flaps of a tent.

Cosimo raised one of those flaps and let me in. By the light of a lantern I saw I was in a kind of little room, covered and enclosed on every side by curtains and carpets, crossed by the trunks of the beech tree, with a floor of stakes, all propped on thick branches. At that moment it seemed a palace to me, but soon I began to realize how unstable it was, for the fact that there were two of us inside was upsetting the balance and Cosimo at once had to get down to the business of repairing leaks. He also opened and put out the two umbrellas I had brought to cover two yawning holes in the roof; but the water was pouring in from various other points and we were both soaked and as cold as if we'd stayed outside. However, such a quantity of blankets was amassed there that we were able to bury ourselves under them, leaving only our heads outside. The lantern sent out an uncertain sputtering light, and the branches and leaves threw intricate shadows on the roof and walls of that strange construction. Cosimo drank the apple syrup in great gulps, gasping, "Puah! Puah!"

"It's a nice house," said I.

"Oh, it's only provisional," replied Cosimo hurriedly. "I've got to think it out better."

"Did you build it all yourself?"

"Of course, who d'you think? It's secret."

"Can I come here?"

"No, or you'll show someone else the way."

"Father said he's giving up the search for you."

"This must be a secret all the same."

"Because of those boys who steal? But aren't they your friends?"

"Sometimes they are and sometimes they aren't."

"And the girl on the pony?"

"What's that to do with you?"

"I meant she's your friend, isn't she, and you play together, don't you?"

"Sometimes we do and sometimes we don't."

"Why only sometimes?"

"Because I may not want to or she may not want to."

"And her, would you let her up here?"

Cosimo, frowning, was trying to spread a straw mat over a branch. "Yes. If she came, I'd let her up," he said gravely.

"Doesn't she want to?"

Cosimo flung himself down. "She's left."

"Say," I whispered, "are you engaged?"

"No," answered my brother and wrapped himself in a long silence.

Next day the weather was fine, and it was decided that Cosimo would begin taking lessons again with Abbé Fauchelefleur. How, was not said. Simply and rather brusquely, the Baron asked the Abbé (". . . instead of just standing there looking at the flies, mon abbé. . .") to go and find my brother wherever he might be and get him to translate a little Virgil. Then, fearing he had put the Abbé in too embarrassing a position, he tried to ease his task, and said to me: "Go and tell your brother to be in the garden in half an hour for his Latin lesson." This he said in as natural a tone as he could, the tone which he intended to keep from then on; even with Cosimo in the trees everything must continue as before.

So the lesson took place. They sat, my brother astride an oak branch, his legs dangling, and the Abbé on the grass beneath, on a stool, intoning hexameters in chorus. I played around there and then wandered off for a short time. When I got back, the Abbé was in the tree. With his long thin legs in their black stockings he was trying to hitch himself onto a fork and Cosimo was helping him by an elbow. They found a comfortable position for the old man, and together deciphered a difficult passage, bending over the book. My brother seemed to be showing great diligence.

Then I don't know what happened, why the pupil made off; perhaps because the Abbé's mind had wandered and he had begun staring into the void as usual; the fact is that suddenly only the black figure of the old priest was left crouched in the branches, his book on his knees, looking at a white butterfly flying by and following it with mouth agape. When the butterfly vanished, the Abbé suddenly realized he was there alone on the tree and felt frightened. He clutched the trunk and began shouting: "Au secours! Au secours!" until people came with a ladder and little by little be calmed down and descended.





} 9 {


IN FACT, Cosimo, despite that escape of his, which had upset us all so much, lived almost as closely with us as he had before. He was a solitary who did not avoid people. In a way, indeed, he seemed to like them more than anything else. He would squat above places where peasants were digging, turning manure or scything the fields, and call out polite greetings. They would raise their heads in surprise and he at once tried to show them where he was, for he had got over the pastime we had so often indulged in when we had been together on the trees before, of thumbing his nose and making faces at passers-by. At first the peasants were rather confused at seeing him covering such distances all on branches, and did not know whether to greet him by doffing their hats as they did with the gently or to shout at him as they did with urchins. Then they got into the habit of chatting with him about their work or the weather, and seemed to find the game he was playing up there no better and no worse than so many other games they had seen the gentry play.

He would sit for whole half-hours at a time, watching their work from the trees and asking questions about seeds and manure which it had never occurred to him to do when he'd been on the ground, prevented then by shyness from ever addressing a word to villagers or servants. Sometimes, he would point out if the furrow they were digging was going straight or crooked; or if the tomatoes in a neighbor's field were already ripe; sometimes he would offer himself for little assignments, such as going to tell the wife of a scyther to bring a whetstone, or warning someone to turn off the water in an orchard. And if, when he was moving around with these messages for the peasants, he happened to see a flight of sparrows settling on a field of corn, he would shout and wave his cap to scare them away.

In his solitary turns around the woods, encounters with humans were memorable though rare, for they were with folk whom people like us never used to meet. In those times a variety of wanderers used to camp in the forests: colliers, tinkers, glass cutters, families driven far from their homes by hunger, to earn their bread by these unstable jobs. They would set up their workshops in the open, and erect shacks, made of branches, to sleep in. At first they were rather alarmed by the boy dressed in fur passing over their heads, particularly the women, who took him for a hobgoblin; then he became friends with them, and spent hours watching them work, and in the evening when they sat around the fire he would settle on a branch nearby, to hear the tales they told.

In a glade covered with beaten cinders the colliers were the most numerous. They would shout "Hura! Hota!" as they were from Bergamo and their speech was impossible to understand. They were the strongest and most self-contained, a corporate body ranging throughout the woods, with links of blood and friendship and enmity. Cosimo would sometimes act as messenger between one group and another, pass on news, and he was asked to go on various errands for them.

"The men under the Red Oak have told me to tell you Hanfa la Hapa Hota'l Hoc!"

"Answer 'em Hegn Hobet Ho de Hot!"

He would remember the mysterious aspirated syllables, and try to mimic them, as he tried to mimic the twitter of the birds which woke him in the morning.

By now the news had spread that a son of the Baron of Rondò had been up in the trees for months; yet our father tried to keep it secret from strangers. There came to visit us, for instance, the Count and Countess of Estomac, on their way to France, where they had estates in the bay of Toulouse. I do not know what self-interest lay behind this visit; claims to certain rights, or the confirmation of a diocese to their son, who was a bishop, for which they needed the agreement of the Baron of Rondò; and our father, as can be imagined, built on this alliance a castle of projects for his dynastic pretensions on Ombrosa.

There was an agonizingly boring dinner, with endless ceremonial, and bowing and scraping all around. The guests had with them a young son, a bewigged little prig. The Baron presented his sons, that is me alone, and added: "My daughter Battista, poor girl, lives such a retired life, is so very pious, that I don't know if you'll be able to see her," and at that moment she showed up, that idiot, in a nun's wimple covered all over with ribbons and frills, a powdered face, and mittens. It should be emphasized that since that business of the young Marchese della Mela she had never once set eyes on a young man, apart from pages and village lads. The young Count of Estomac bowed; she broke into hysterical laughter. The Baron, who had already given up his daughter as a lost cause, now began to mill over new possibilities in his mind.

But the old Count made a show of indifference. He asked: "Didn't you have another son, Monsieur Arminio?"

"Yes, the eldest," said our father, "but, as luck would have it, he's out shooting."

He had not lied, as at that period Cosimo was always in the woods with his gun, after hares and thrushes. The gun was one I had got for him, it was the light one Battista had used against the mice and which for some time she—having given up that particular sport—had abandoned on a nail.

The Count began to ask about the game thereabouts. The Baron in his replies kept to generalities, as, taking no interest in the world around him, he did not know how to shoot. I now interrupted the conversation, though I had been forbidden to say a word when grownups were talking.

"And what does anyone as young as you know about it?" asked the Count.

"I go and fetch the game my brother brings down, and take them up the . . ." I was just saying when our father interrupted me.

"Who asked you to say anything? Go and play."

We were in the garden. It was evening and still light, since it was summer. And now over the plane trees and oaks Cosimo came calmly along, with his cap of cat's fur on his head, his gun slung on one shoulder, a spear on the other, and his legs in gaiters.

"Hey, hey!" exclaimed the Count, getting up and moving his head to see better, much amused. "Who's that? Who's that on the trees?"

"What? What? I really don't know . . ." began our father, and instead of looking in the direction where the other was pointing, looked in the Count's eyes as if to assure himself he could see well.

Cosimo meanwhile had reached a point right above them, and was standing on a fork with legs spread apart.

"Ah, it's my son, yes, Cosimo. Just a boy, you see. To give us a surprise he's climbed up there . . ."

"Is he your eldest son?"

"Yes, yes, of the two boys he's the eldest, but only by a little, you know. They're still children, playing . . ."

"But he must be a bright lad to go over branches like that. And with that arsenal on him . . ."

"Eh, just playing," and with a terrible effort at lying which made him go red all over he called: "What are you doing up there? Eh? Will you come down? Come and greet our Lord Count here!"

Cosimo took off his cat's-fur cap, and bowed. "My respects, Lord Count."

"Ah, ah, ah!" laughed the Count. "Fine, fine! Let him stay up there, let him stay up there, Monsieur Arminio! A very clever boy at getting about trees!" and he laughed.

And even that little dolt of a count kept on repeating: "C'est original, ça c'est tres original!"

Cosimo sat down there on the fork, our father changed the subject and talked on and on in the hope of diverting the Count's attention. But every now and again the Count raised his eyes and there my brother always was, up that tree or another, cleaning his gun, or greasing his gaiters or, as night was coming, on donning his flannel shirt.

"Oh! But look! He can do everything up there, that boy can! What fun! Ah, I'll tell them about it at Court, the very first time I go there. I'll tell my son the Bishop! I'll tell my aunt the Princess!"

My father could scarcely control himself any longer. And he had another worry on his mind; he could not see his daughter around, and the young Count had vanished too.

Cosimo had gone off on one of his tours of exploration, and now came panting back. "She's given him the hiccups! She's given him the hiccups!"

The Count looked worried. "Oh, that's unfortunate. My son suffers a lot from hiccups. Do go, like a good boy, and see what's happening. Tell 'em to come back."

Cosimo went jumping off, and came back panting more than ever. "They're chasing each other. She wants to put a live lizard under his shirt to get rid of his hiccups! He doesn't want her to!" And off he skipped for another look.

So we spent that evening at home, not so very different in truth from others, with Cosimo sneaking around the edges of our lives from up on the trees; but that time we had guests, and as a result the news of my brother's behavior spread over the courts of Europe, to the great shame of our father. Quite a baseless shame, for the Count of Estomac went away with a favorable impression of our family, and as a result our sister Battista became engaged to the little Count.





} 10 {


THE olives, because of their tortuous shapes, were comfortable and easy passages for Cosimo, patient trees with rough, friendly bark on which he could pass or pause, in spite of the scarcity of thick branches and the monotony of movement which resulted from their shapes. On a fig tree, though, as long as he saw to it that a branch could bear his weight, he could move about forever; Cosimo would stand under the pavilion of leaves, watching the sun appear through the network of twigs and branches, the gradual swell of the green fruit, smelling the scent of flowers budding in the stalks. The fig tree seemed to absorb him, permeate him with its gummy texture and the buzz of hornets; after a little Cosimo would begin to feel he was becoming a fig himself, and move away, uneasy. On the hard sorb apple or the mulberry he was all right; a pity they were so rare. Or the nut. . . sometimes seeing my brother lose himself in the endless spread of an old nut tree, like some palace of many floors and innumerable rooms, I found a longing coming over me to imitate him and go and live up there too; such is the strength and certainty that this tree had in being a tree, its determination to be hard and heavy expressed even in its leaves.

Cosimo would spend happy hours, too, amid the undulating leaves of the ilex (or holm oak, as I have called them when describing the ones in our park, perhaps influenced by our father's stilted language) and he loved its peeling bark from which, when preoccupied, he would pick off a piece with his fingers, not from any desire to do harm, but to help the tree in its long travail of rebirth. Or he would peel away the white bark of a plane tree, uncovering layers of old yellow mildew. He also loved the knobby trucks like the elm, with the tender shoots and clusters of little jagged leaves and twigs growing out of the whorls; but it wasn't an easy tree to move about on as the branches grew upwards, slender and thickly covered, leaving little foothold. In the woods he preferred beeches and oaks; the pines had very close-knit branches, brittle and thick with cones, leaving him no space or support; and the chestnut, with its prickly leaves, husks and bark, and its high branches, seemed a good tree to avoid.

These sympathies and antipathies Cosimo came to recognize in time—or to recognize consciously, but already in those first days they had begun to be an instinctive part of him. Now it was a whole different world, made up of narrow curved bridges in the emptiness, of knots or peel or scores roughening the trunks, of lights varying their green according to the veils of thicker or scarcer leaves, trembling at the first quiver of the air on the shoots or moving like sails with the bend of the tree in the wind. While down below our world lay flattened, and our bodies looked quite disproportionate and we certainly understood nothing of what he knew up there—he who spent his nights listening to the sap running through its cells; the circles marking the years inside the trunks; the patches of mold growing ever larger helped by the north wind; the birds sleeping and quivering in their nests, then resettling their heads in the softest down of their wings; and the caterpillar waking, and the chrysalis opening. There is the moment when the silence of the countryside gathers in the ear and breaks into a myriad of sounds: a croaking and squeaking, a swift rustle in the grass, a plop in the water, a pattering on earth and pebbles, and high above all, the call of the cicada. The sounds follow one another, and the ear eventually discerns more and more of them—just as fingers unwinding a ball of wool fed each fiber interwoven with progressively thinner and less palpable threads. The frogs continue croaking in the background without changing the flow of sounds, just as light does not vary from the continuous winking of stars. But at every rise or fall of the wind every sound changes and is renewed. All that remains in the inner recess of the ear is a vague murmur: the sea.

Winter came. Cosimo made himself a fur jacket. He sewed it from the fur of various animals he had hunted: hares, foxes, martens and ferrets. On his head he still wore that cap of wildcat's fur. He also made himself some goatskin breeches with leather knees. As for shoes, he eventually realized that the best footgear for the trees was slippers, and he made himself a pair of some skin or other—perhaps badger.

So he defended himself against the cold. It should be said that in those days the winters in our parts were mild, and never had the freezing cold of nowadays which they say was loosed from its lair in Russia by Napoleon and followed him all the way here. But even so, spending the winter nights out in the open could not have been easy.

At night Cosimo eventually found a fur sleeping bag best; no more tents or shacks; a sleeping bag with fur inside, hung on a branch. He got inside, the outside world vanished and he slept tucked up like a child. If there was an unusual sound in the night, from the mouth of the bag emerged the fur cap, the barrel of the gun, then his round eyes. (They said that his eyes had become luminous in the dark like a cat's or owl's; but I never noticed it myself.)

In the morning, on the other hand, when the jackdaw croaked, from the bag would come a pair of clenched fists; the fists rose in the air and were followed by two arms slowly widening and stretching, and in the movement drawing out his yawning mouth, his shoulders with a gun slung over one and a powder horn over another, and his slightly bandy legs (they were beginning to lose their straightness from his habit of always moving on all fours or in a crouch). Out jumped these legs. They stretched too, and so, with a shake of the back and a scratch under his fur jacket, Cosimo, wakeful and fresh as a rose, was ready to begin his day.

He went to the fountain, for he had a hanging fountain of his own, invented by himself, or rather made with the help of nature. There was a stream which at a certain place dropped sheer in a cascade, and nearby grew an oak, with very high branches. Cosimo, with a piece of scooped-out poplar a couple of yards long, had made a kind of gutter which brought the water from the cascade to the branches of the oak tree, where he could drink and wash. That he did wash is sure, for I have seen him doing so a number of times; not much and not even every day, but he did wash; he also had soap. With the soap, when he happened to feel like it, he would also wash his linen; he had taken a tub into the oak tree for this purpose. Then he would hang the things to dry on ropes from one branch to another.

In fact he did everything in the trees. He had also found a way to roast the game he caught, on a spit, without ever coming down. This is what he did; he would light a pine cone with a flint and throw it to the ground on a spot already arranged for a fire (I had set this up, with some smooth stones); then he would drop twigs and dried branches on it, regulating the flame with a poker tied on a long stick in such a way that it reached the spit, which was hanging from two branches. All this called for great care, as it is easy to start a fire in the woods. And the fireplace was set on purpose under the oak tree, near the cascade from which he could draw all the water he wanted in case of danger.

Thus, partly by eating what he shot, partly by bartering with the peasants for fruit and vegetables, he managed very well, and we no longer needed to send any food out to him from the house. One day we heard that he was drinking fresh milk every morning; he had made friends with a goat, which would climb up the fork of an olive tree a foot or two from the ground; but it did not really climb up, it just put its two rear hoofs up, so that he could come down onto the fork with a pail and milk it. He had a similar arrangement with a chicken, a red Paduan, a very good layer. He had made it a secret nest in the hole of a trunk, and on alternate days he would find an egg, which he drank after making two holes in it with a pin.

Another problem: doing his daily duties. At the beginning he did them wherever he happened to be, here or there it didn't matter, the world was big. Then he realized this was not very nice. So he found, on the banks of a stream called the Merdanzo, an alder tree leaning over a most suitable and secluded part of the water, with a fork on which he could seat himself comfortably. The Merdanzo was a dark torrent, hidden among the bamboos, with a quick flow, and the villages nearby threw their slops into it. So the young Piovasco di Rondò lived a civilized life, respecting the decencies of his neighbor and himself.

But he lacked a necessary complement to his huntsman's life—a dog. There was I, flinging myself among the thorns and bushes, searching for a thrush, a snipe or a quail, which had fallen after being shot in mid air, or even looking out for foxes when, after a night on the prowl, one of them would stop with its long tail extended just outside the bushes. But only rarely could I escape to join him in the woods; lessons with the Abbé, study, serving Mass, meals with my parents kept me back; the hundred and one duties of family life I submitted to, because, after all, the phrase which was always being repeated around me—"One rebel in a family is enough"—made sense and left a mark on me all my life.

So Cosimo almost always went hunting alone, and to recover the game (except in rare cases such as when a golden oriole's wings would catch on a branch as it fell) he used a kind of fishing tackle; rods with string and hooks, but he did not always succeed in reaching it, and sometimes a snipe ended black with ants in the bottom of a gully.

I have spoken up to now only of retrievers. For Cosimo then did only the kind of shooting which meant spending mornings and nights crouched on his branch, waiting for a thrush to pause on some exposed twig, or a hare to appear in the open space of a field. If not, he wandered about at random, following the song of the birds, or guessing the most probable tracks of the animals. And when he heard the baying of hounds behind a hare or a fox, he knew he must avoid them, for these were not animals for him, a solitary casual hunter. Respectful of the rules as he was, when from his observation post he noticed or could aim at some game chased by the hounds of others, he would never raise his gun. He would wait for the huntsman to arrive panting along the path, with ears cocked and eyes bleared, and point out to him the direction the animal had taken.

One day he saw a fox on the run: a red streak in the middle of the green grass, whiskers erect, snorting fearfully; it crossed the field and vanished into the undergrowth. And behind: "Oohowowah!"—the hounds.

They arrived at a gallop, their noses to the ground, twice found themselves without the smell of fox in their nostrils and then turned away at a right angle.

They were already some way off when, with a howl of "Oohee, Oohee!" cleaving through the grass with leaps that were more like a fish's than a dog's, came a kind of dolphin; he was swimming along and mining, with a nose sharper and ears droopier than a bloodhound's. His rear end was just like that of a fish propelled by fins, or web feet, legless and very long. He came out into the open; a dachshund.

He must have tagged after the hounds and been left behind, young as he was, almost a puppy. The sound of the hounds was now a "Boohahf" of annoyance, because they had lost the scent, and the running pack became scattered all around an open field, too anxious to find the lost scent again and to make a real search for it, and losing their impetus, so that already one or two of them were taking the opportunity of raising their legs against a rock.

The dachshund, panting hard, trotting along with his nose in the air in unjustified triumph, finally reached the hounds. He was still triumphant and gave a cunning howl: "Ooheeyah! Ooheeyah!"

The hounds snarled at once—"Owrrrch"—and quit their search for the fox's scent a minute and went toward the dachshund, their mouths open ready to bite—"Ghrrrr!" Then they quickly lost interest again, and ran off.

Cosimo followed the dachshund, which was now moving about haphazardly, and the dog, wavering with a distracted nose, saw the boy on the tree and wagged his tail. Cosimo felt sure that the fox was still hidden nearby. The hounds were scattered a long way off. They could be heard every now and again from the opposite slope barking in a broken and aimless way, urged on by the muted voices of the hunters. Cosimo said to the dachshund: "Go on! Go on! Look for it!"

The puppy flung himself about sniffing hard, and every now and again turned his face up to look at the boy.

"Go on! Go on!" Cosimo urged him.

Now Cosimo could not see the dog any more. He heard a crashing among the bushes, then, suddenly: "Owowowah! Eeayee! Eeayeeah!" the dachshund had raised the fox!

Cosimo saw the animal run out into the field. But could he fire at a fox raised by someone else's dog? Cosimo let it pass and did not shoot. The dachshund lifted his snout toward the boy, with the look of dogs when they do not understand and are not sure whether they should understand, and flung his nose down again, behind the fox.

"Eeayee, eeayee, eeayee!" The fox made a complete round. There, it was coming back. Could he fire or couldn't he? He didn't. The dachshund turned a sad eye up at him. He was not barking any more, his tongue was drooping more than his ears. He was exhausted, but he still went on running.

The dachshund's raising of the fox had baffled both hounds and hunters. Along the path was running an old man with a heavy arquebus. "Hey," called Cosimo, "is that dachshund yours?"

"A plague on you and all your family!" shouted the old man, who must have been a bit cracked. "Do we look like people who hunt with a dachshund?"

"Then whatever he puts up, I can shoot," insisted Cosimo, who really wanted to do the right thing.

"Shoot at your guardian angel for all I care!" replied the other, as he hurried off.

The dachshund chased the fox back again to Cosimo's tree. Cosimo shot at it and hit it. The dachshund was his dog; he called him Ottimo Massimo.

Ottimo Massimo was no one's dog, he had joined the pack of hounds from youthful enthusiasm. But where did he come from? To discover this, Cosimo let him lead him.

The dachshund, his belly grazing the ground, crossed hedges and ditches; then he turned to see if the boy up there was managing to follow his tracks. So unusual was his route that Cosimo did not realize at once where they had got to. When he understood, his heart gave a leap; it was the garden of the Ondarivas.

The villa was shut, the shutters pulled to; only one, on an attic window, was in the wind. More than ever the garden had the look of a forest from another world. And along the alleys now overgrown with weeds and the bush-laden flower bed), Ottimo Massimo moved happily, as if at home, chasing butterflies.

He vanished into a thicket and came back with a ribbon. Cosimo's heart gave another leap. "What is it, Ottimo Massimo? Eh? Whose is it? Tell me?"

Ottimo Massimo wagged its tail.

"Bring it here, Ottimo Massimo!"

Cosimo came down on to a low branch and took from the dog's mouth a faded piece of ribbon which must have been a hair ribbon of Viola's, just as that dog was certainly Viola's dog, forgotten there in the last move of the family. In fact, Cosimo now seemed to remember him from the summer before, as still a puppy, peeping out of a basket in the arms of the fair-haired girl; perhaps they had just that moment brought him to her as a present.

"Search, Ottimo Massimo!" The dachshund threw himself among the bamboos; and came back with other mementos of her, a skipping rope, a piece of an old kite, a fan.

At the top of the trunk of the highest tree in the garden, my brother carved with the point of his rapier the names Viola and Cosimo and then, lower down, certain that it would give her pleasure even if he called him by another name, "Ottimo Massimo, Dachshund."

From that time on, whenever we saw the boy on the trees we could be sure he was looking for the dachshund. Ottimo would trot along belly to ground. Cosimo had taught him how to search, stop, and bring back game, the jobs every hunting dog does, and there was no woodland creature that they did not hunt together. To bring him the game, Ottimo Massimo would clamber with two paws as high up the trunk as he could; Cosimo would lean down, take the hare or the partridge from his mouth and pat him on the head. These were all their intimacies, their celebrations. But between the two on the ground and branches ran a continual dialogue, an understanding, of monosyllabic baying and tongue-clicking and finger-snapping. That necessary presence which man is for a dog and a dog for man, never betrayed either; and though they were different from all other men and dogs in the world, they could still call themselves happy, as man and dog.





} 11 {


FOR a long time—one whole period of his adolescence—hunting was Cosimo's world. And fishing too, for he would wait for eels and trout with a line in the ponds and streams. Sometimes he seemed almost to have developed instincts and senses different from ours, as if those skins he had made into clothes corresponded to a total change in his nature. Certainly the continual contact with the barks of trees, his eyes trained to the movement of a feather, a hair, a scale, to the range of colors of his world, and then the various greens circulating through the veins of leaves like blood from another world; all those forms of life so far removed from the human as the stem of a plant, the beak of a thrush, the gill of a fish, those borders of the wild into which he was so deeply urged—all might have molded his mind, made him lose every semblance of man. But, no matter how many new qualities he acquired from his closeness with plants and his struggles with animals, his place—it always seemed to me—was clearly with us.

But even without meaning to, he found certain habits becoming rarer—and finally abandoned them altogether—such as following High Mass in Ombrosa. For the first months he tried to do so. Every Sunday, as we came out of the house—the whole family dressed up ceremonially—we would find him on the branches, he too rigged in an attempt at ceremonial dress, such as his old tunic, or his tricorn instead of the fur cap. We would set off, and he would follow us over the branches. So we reached the entrance to the church, with all the people of Ombrosa looking at us (soon even my father became used to it and his embarrassment decreased)—we were all walking with great dignity, he jumping in the air. A strange sight, particularly in winter, with the trees bare.

We would enter the cathedral and sit at our family pew, while he stayed outside, kneeling on an ilex beside one of the naves, just at the height of a big window. From our pew we would see, through the windows, the shadows of the branches and, in the middle, Cosimo's with hat on chest and head bowed. By agreement between my father and one of the sacristans, that window was kept half open every Sunday, so that my brother could attend Mass from his tree. But as time went by we saw him there no more. The window was closed as it made a draught.

Many things which would have been important to him before were now no longer. In the spring our sister got engaged. Who would have thought it only a year before? That Count and Countess of Estomac came with the young Count and there were great celebrations. Every room in our house was lit up, all the local nobility were invited, and there was dancing. Why should we think of Cosimo, then? Well, we did think of him, all of us. Every now and then I looked out the window to see if he was coming. Our father was sad, and at that family celebration he must have been thinking of him who had excluded himself from it. The Generalessa, who was ordering the whole party about as if she were on a parade ground, was only doing so as an outlet for her feelings about her absent son. Perhaps even Battista, pirouetting around, unrecognizable now that she was out of her nunnish clothes—wearing a wig which looked like marzipan, and a grand panier decorated with corals, made up for her by some dressmaker or other—even she was thinking of him I could have sworn.

And he was there, unseen—I heard about it afterwards—in the shadows, on the top of a plane tree, in the cold, watching the brightly lit windows, the rooms he knew so well festooned for the party, the bewigged dancers. What thoughts could have crossed his mind? Did he regret our life a little? Was he thinking how brief was the step which separated him from a return to our world, how brief and how easy? I have no idea what he thought, what he wanted, up there. I only know that he stayed for the whole of the party, and even beyond it, until one by one the chandeliers were put out and not a lit window remained.

So Cosimo's relations with the family, either good or bad, continued. In fact, they became closer with one member of it—whom he only really now got to know—the Cavalier Enea Silvio Carrega. This vague, elusive little man (nobody ever knew where he was and what he was doing), Cosimo discovered to be the only one of the whole family who had a great number of pursuits and none of them useless.

He would go out, sometimes in the hottest hour of the afternoon, with his fez stuck on the top of his head, shambling along, his long robe trailing on the ground, and vanish almost as if he had been swallowed up by a crevice in the earth or hedges, or the stones in the walls. Cosimo, too, who passed his time always on the watch (or rather it was not a pastime now, it was his natural state, as if his eye had to embrace a horizon wide enough to understand all), would suddenly lose sight of him. Sometimes he used to start running from branch to branch toward the place where the old man vanished, without ever succeeding in finding where he had gone. But one sign always appeared in the area where he was last seen: flying bees. Eventually Cosimo was convinced that the presence of the Cavalier was linked with the bees, and that in order to find him he would have to follow their flight. But how could he? Around each flowering plant was a scattered buzz of bees; he must not let himself be distracted into isolated and secondary routes, but follow the invisible airy way in which the coming and going of bees was growing thicker and thicker, until he reached a dense cloud rising like smoke from behind a bush. There behind were the beehives, one by one or in rows on a table, and busy about them, with bees buzzing all around him, was the Cavalier.

Beekeeping was in fact one of our uncle's secret activities; secret to a point only, for he himself every now and again would bring to the table a gleaming honeycomb fresh from the hive; but this activity of his took place outside the boundaries of our property, in places which he evidently did not want us to know about. It must have been a precaution on his part, to prevent the profits of this personal industry of his from passing through the family accounts; or—since the man was certainly not a miser, and anyway could not expect much of a profit from such small quantities of honey and wax—in order to have something in which the Baron, his brother, could not poke his nose, or pretend to be guiding him; or again in order not to mingle the few things which he loved, such as beekeeping, with the many which he did not love, such as administration.

Anyway, the fact remained that our father had never allowed him to keep bees near the house, as the Baron had an unreasonable fear of being stung; when by chance he happened to come across a bee or a wasp in the garden he would run along the alleys, looking ridiculous, thrusting his hands into his wig as if to protect himself from the pecks of an eagle. Once, as he was doing this, his wig slipped, the bee, disturbed by his sudden movement, turned against him and plunged its sting into his bald pate. For three days he tended his head with compresses soaked in vinegar, for he was that kind of man, very proud and strong in serious matters, but frenzied by a slight scratch or pimple.

And so Enea Silvio Carrega had scattered his beehives all over the valley of Ombrosa; various landowners had given him permission to keep a beehive or two on a strip of their land in return for a little honey, and he was always going the rounds from one to the other, working at the beehives busily moving his hands, which, in order not to be stung, he had thrust into long black mitts. On his face, beneath his fez, he wore a black veil which clung to him or blew out at every breath. He used to wave about an instrument that scattered smoke, so as to chase the insects away while he was searching in the beehive. The whole scene, the buzz of bees, the veils and clouds of smoke, all seemed to Cosimo a spell which the old man was trying to cast so as to vanish, be obliterated, flown off, and then be reborn elsewhere, in another time or another place. But he was not much of a magician as he always reappeared just the same, though sometimes sucking a bitten thumb.

It was spring. One morning Cosimo saw the air vibrating with a sound he had never heard, a buzz growing at times almost into a roar, and a curtain of what looked like hail, which instead of falling was moving in a horizontal direction and turning and twisting slowly around, but following a kind of denser column. It was a great mass of bees; and around was greenery and flowers and sun; and Cosimo, he did not understand why, felt himself gripped by a wild and savage excitement. "The bees are escaping! Cavalier! The bees are escaping!" he shouted, running along the trees searching for Carrega.

"They're not escaping, they're swarming," said the voice of the Cavalier, and Cosimo saw he had sprung up like a mushroom below him and was making signs for him to be quiet. Then suddenly the old man ran off and vanished. Where had he gone to?

It was swarming time. A group of bees was following a queen bee outside the old hives. Cosimo looked around. Now the Cavalier reappeared from the kitchen door with a saucepan and ladle in his hand. He banged the ladle against the saucepan and raised a very loud dong-dong which resounded in the eardrums and died away in a long vibration so disturbing that it made Cosimo want to stop up his ears. The Cavalier was following the swarm of bees, hitting these copper instruments at every three steps. At each bang the swarm seemed seized by shock, made a rapid dip and turn, and its buzz lowered, its line of flight got more uncertain. Cosimo could not see well, but it seemed to him that the whole swarm was now converging toward a point in the wood and not going beyond it. And Carrega went on banging his pots.

"What's happening, Cavalier? What are you doing?" my brother asked him, coming up closer.

"Quick!" hissed the other. "Go to the tree where the swarm has stopped, but be careful not to move it till I arrive!"

His bees were making for a pomegranate tree. Cosimo reached it and at first saw nothing, then suddenly realized that what looked like a big pine cone hanging from a branch, was in fact bees clinging to each other, with more and more coming along to make the cone bigger.

Cosimo stood at the top of the pomegranate, holding his breath. Beneath him was the cluster of bees, and the bigger it became the lighter it seemed, as if it were hanging by a thread, or even less, by the claws of an old queen bee; it was all thin tissue, with rustling wings spreading diaphanous grays over the black and yellow stripes on bellies.

The Cavalier came leaping up, holding a beehive in his hand. He held it upside down under the cluster of bees. "Hey," he whispered to Cosimo. "Give the branch a little shake, will you?"

Cosimo made the pomegranate just quiver. The swarm of thousands of bees broke off like a leaf and fell into the hive, over which the Cavalier put a plank. "There we are."

So between Cosimo and the Cavalier there arose an understanding, a collaboration which could almost have been called friendship, if friendship did not seem too excessive a term for two people who were both so unsociable.

My brother and Enea Silvio also got together, eventually, on the subject of hydraulics. That may seem odd, for one living on the trees must find it rather difficult to have anything to do with wells and canals, but I have mentioned the kind of hanging fountain Cosimo had made from a length of scooped-out poplar to bring water from a fall to an oak. Now the Cavalier, though apparently so vague, noticed everything that had to do with moving water over the whole countryside. From above the cascade, hidden behind a privet hedge, he had watched Cosimo pull out this wooden pipe from between the branches of the oak (where he kept it when he did not use it, following the habit of wild animals, which had immediately become his, of hiding everything), prop it on a fork of the tree on one side and on some stones on the other, and drink.

At this sight something seems to have taken wing in the Cavalier's head; he was swept by a rare moment of euphoria. He jumped out of the bush, clapped his hands, gave two or three skips as if on a rope, splashed the water, and nearly jumped into the cascade and flew down the precipice. And he began to explain to the boy the idea he had had. The idea was confused and the explanation very confused. The Cavalier normally spoke in dialect—from modesty rather than ignorance of the language—but in these sudden moments of excitement he would pass from dialect to Turkish without noticing it, and not another word of his could be understood.

To make a long story short: his idea was a hanging aqueduct; with a conducting pipe held up by branches of trees, which would reach the bare slope of the valley opposite it and irrigate it. Cosimo supported the project at once, and suggested a refinement: using pierced tree trunks at certain points for the water to sprinkle over the crops like rain; this sent the Cavalier almost into ecstasy.

He rushed back to his study, and filled pages and pages with plans. Cosimo took to working on this idea too, for everything that could be done on trees pleased him, and gave, he felt, a new importance and authority to his position up there; and in Enea Silvio Carrega he seemed to have found an unexpected companion. They made appointments on certain low trees; the Cavalier would climb up with a triangular ladder, his arms full of rolls of drawings; and they would discuss for hours the ever more complicated developments of their aqueduct.

But it never reached a practical stage. Enea Silvio grew tired, his discussions with Cosimo became rarer, and after a week he probably forgot all about it. Cosimo did not regret it; he had soon realized it would become just a tiresome complication in his life and nothing else.

It was clear our uncle could have achieved much in the field of hydraulics. He had a bent for it—a particular turn of mind necessary to that branch of study—but he was incapable of putting his projects into practice; he would waste more and more time, until every plan ended in nothing, like badly channeled water which after whirling around a little is sucked up into the porous earth. The reason perhaps was this, that while he could dedicate himself to beekeeping, on his own, almost in secret, without having to deal with anyone, producing every now and again just a present of a honeycomb which no one had asked him for, this work of irrigation, on the other hand, meant considering the interests of this man or that, following the opinions and the orders of the Baron or of whoever else commissioned the work. Timid and irresolute as he was, he would never oppose the will of others, but would soon dissociate himself from the work and leave it.

He could be seen at all hours in the middle of a field among men armed with stakes and spades, he with a slide rule and the rolled sheet of a map, giving orders to dig for a canal and pacing the ground out by greatly exaggerating his normal stride. He would get the men to begin digging in one place, then in another, then call a halt, then start taking measurements again. Night fell and the work was suspended. Next day he would rarely resume work where they'd left off. And then for a week he was nowhere to be found. His passion for hydraulics consisted of aspirations, impulses, yearnings. It was a memory he had in his heart of the lovely, well-irrigated lands of the Sultan, of orchards and gardens in which he must have been happy, the only really happy time of his life; and to those gardens of Barbary or Turkey he would be continually comparing our countryside at Ombrosa, and so felt an urge to correct it, to try to identify it with the landscape in his memory, and being a specialist in hydraulics, he concentrated in that his desire for change, continually came up against a different reality, and was disappointed.

He also practiced water divining, not openly, though, for those were still times when that strange art could be considered witchcraft. Once Cosimo found him in a field twirling and holding a forked stick. That must have been just an experiment too, as nothing came of it.

Understanding the character of Enea Silvio Carrega was a help to Cosimo; it made him understand a lot about loneliness, which was to be of use to him later in life. I should say that he always carried with him the strange image of the Cavalier, as a warning of what can happen to a man who separates his own fate from others, and he managed never to be like him.





} 12 {


SOMETIMES Cosimo used to be awakened in the night by cries of "Help! Brigands! Quick!"

Off he would hurry through the trees toward the direction from which the cries were coming. This might turn out to be some peasant cottage, with a half-naked family outside tearing their hair.

"Help, help, Gian dei Brughi has just come and taken our whole earnings from the crop!"

People crowded together.

"Gian dei Brughi? Was it him? Did you see him?"

"Yes, it was! It was! He had a mask on his face and a long pistol, and he had two masked men behind him and was ordering 'em about! It was Gian dei Brughi!"

"And where is he? Where did he go?"

"Oh, catch Gian dei Brughi? He might be anywhere, by now!"

Or the shouts might be coming from a passer-by left in the middle of the road robbed of everything—horse, purse, cloak and baggage. "Help! Thief! Gian dei Brughi!"

"Which way did he go? Tell me!"

"He jumped out of there! Black, bearded, musket at the ready, I'm lucky to be alive!"

"Quick! Let's follow him! Which way did he go?"

"That way! No, perhaps this! He was running like the wind!" Cosimo was determined to see Gian dei Brughi. He would go through the length and breadth of the wood behind hares or birds, urging on the dachshund: "Go on, to it, Ottimo Massimo!" What he longed for was to track down the bandit in person, not to do or say anything to him, but just to look someone so renowned in the face. But he never succeeded in meeting him, even by prowling all night. "That means he hasn't been out tonight," Cosimo would say to himself; but in the morning, on one side or other of the valley, he would find groups of people standing on their doorsteps or at a turn of the road and commenting on the new robbery. Cosimo would hurry up and listen with bated breath to their stories.

"But you're always on the trees in the woods," someone said to him. "Surely you must have seen Gian dei Brughi?"

Cosimo felt very ashamed. "But. . . I don't think so. . ."

"How could he have seen him?" asked another. "Gian dei Brughi has hiding places no one can find, and uses paths not a soul knows about!"

"With that reward on his head, whoever gets him can spend the rest of their lives in comfort!"

"Yes, indeed! But those who do know where he is have as many accounts with justice as he has, and if they say a word they'll go straight to the gibbet themselves!"

"Gian dei Brughi! Gian dei Brughi! But d'you think he really commits all these crimes himself?"

"Of course he's got so much to account for that even if he managed to be cleared of ten thefts, he'd still be hanged for the eleventh!"

"He's been a brigand in all the woods along the coast!"

"He's even killed a leader of his, in his youth!"

"He's been banished by the bandits themselves!"

"That's why he's taken refuge in our area."

Cosimo would go and talk over every new incident with the colliers. Among the people camped in the wood, beside the colliers, tinkers and glass cutters, there were men who covered chairs in straw, rag-and-bone merchants, people who went around houses and planned in the morning the theft they would commit that night. In the woods they hid their loot in a secret refuge which was also their workshop.

"D'you know, Gian dei Brughi attacked a coach last night!"

"Ah yes? Well, maybe . . ."

"He stopped the galloping horses by grasping their bits!"

"Well, either it wasn't him or those horses were grasshoppers . . ."

"What's that you're saying? Don't you believe it was Gian dei Brughi?"

"Ha, ha, ha!"

When he heard them talk of Gian dei Brughi like that, Cosimo did not know if he was on his head or his heels. He moved about the wood and went and asked another encampment of tramps.

"Tell me, d'you think that job on the carriage last night was Gian dei Brughi's?"

"Every job is Gian dei Brughi's, when it succeeds. Didn't you know?"

"Why, when it succeeds?"

"Because when it doesn't, it means it really is Gian dei Brughi's!"

"Ha, ha! That bungler'."

Cosimo could not understand at all. "D'you mean Gian dei Brughi's a bungler?"

The others then hurriedly changed their tone. "No, no, of course not, he's a brigand who frightens everyone!"

"Have you seen him yourself?"

"Us? Has anyone ever seen him?"

"But are you sure he exists?"

"What a thing to say! Sure he exists? Why, even if he didn't exist. . ."

"If he didn't exist?"

". . . it wouldn't make any difference. Ha, ha, ha!"

"But everyone says. . ."

"Sure, what should they say; that it's Gian dei Brughi who steals and robs everywhere, that terrible brigand! We'd just like to see anyone doubting that!"

"And you, boy, you don't doubt it, do you?"

Cosimo began to realize that Gian dei Brughi was more feared down in the valley, and that the farther one got into the woods, the more the attitude changed into one of doubt and even open derision.

So his longing to meet the brigand passed as he realized that the real experts did not bother about Gian dei Brughi at all. And it was just then that he did happen to come across him.

Cosimo was on a nut tree one afternoon, reading. He had recently begun to pick up a few books again. Spending the whole day with a gun watching for a chaffinch gets boring in the long run.

Well, there he was reading Lesage's Gil Blas, holding his book in one hand and his gun in the other. Ottimo Massimo, who did not like seeing his master read, was wandering around in circles looking for excuses to disturb him; by barking, for instance, at a butterfly, to see if that would make Cosimo point his gun at it.

And then down the path from the mountain came running and panting a bearded, shabby, unarmed man, with two constables brandishing sabres and shouting behind him: "Stop him! Stop him! It's Gian dei Brughi! We've caught him, at last!"

Now the brigand had gained a little on the constables, but he was moving rather awkwardly as if afraid of mistaking the way or falling into a trap, and so having them soon on his heels again.

Cosimo's nut tree did not offer much chance for anyone to climb up it, but on his branch he had a rope which he always took about with him for difficult parts. He flung one end on to the ground and tied the other to the branch. The brigand saw this rope falling almost on his nose, faltered a moment; and then quickly clambered up, thus showing himself to be one of those impulsive waverers or wavering impulsives who always seem to be incapable of catching the right moment for doing anything and yet hit it every time.

The constables reached the spot. The rope had already been pulled up and Gian dei Brughi was sitting by Cosimo among the leaves of the nut tree. There was a fork in the path ahead. The constables took one each, then met again, and did not know where to go next. And then they bumped into Ottimo Massimo, who was sniffing around there.

"Hey," said one of the constables to the other, "doesn't that dog belong to the Baron's son, the one who's always up trees? If the boy is around anywhere here, he might be able to tell us something."

"I'm up here!" Cosimo called out. But he did it not from the nut tree where he had been before and where he had hidden the brigand, but from a chestnut opposite, to which he had quickly moved, so that the constables raised their heads at once in that direction without beginning to look at the trees around.

"Good day, your Lordship," said they. "You haven't by chance seen the brigand Gian dei Brughi?"

"I don't know who he is," replied Cosimo, "but if you're looking for a little man, running, he took the road over there by the stream. . ."

"A little man? He's a great big man who frightens everyone. . ."

"Well, from up here everyone seems quite small. . ."

"Thank you, your Lordship!" and they moved off toward the stream.

Cosimo went back into the nut tree and began to read Gil Blas again. Gian dei Brughi was still clinging to the branch, his face pale in the midst of red hair, his beard disheveled, stuck all over with dried leaves, chestnuts and pine needles. He was looking at Cosimo with a pair of green, round, stunned eyes; how ugly he was!

"Have they gone?" he decided to ask.

"Yes, yes," said Cosimo affably. "Are you the brigand Gian dei Brughi?"

"How d'you know me?"

"Oh, just by reputation."

"Are you the one who never comes down from the trees?"

"Yes. How do you know that?"

"Well, I hear of reputations too."

They looked at each other politely, like two respectable folk meeting by chance, who are pleased to find they are not unknown to each other.

Cosimo did not know what else to say, and began reading again. "What are you reading?"

"Lesage's Gil Blas."

"Is it good?"

"Oh yes."

"Have you a lot more to read?"

"Why? Well, twenty pages or so."

"Because when you've finished it, I'd like to ask if I can borrow it." He smiled rather confusedly. "You know, I spend my days hiding, and never know what to do with myself. If I only had a book every now and then, I say. Once I stopped a carriage, very little in it, except for a book, and I took that. I brought it up with me, hidden under my jacket. I'd have given all the rest of the booty to keep that book. In the evening, lighting my lantern, I went to read it. . . it was in Latin! I couldn't understand a word . . ." He shook his head. "You see, I don't know Latin . . ."

"Oh well, Latin. That's difficult," said Cosimo, feeling that in spite of himself he was taking a protective attitude "This one is in French. . ."

"French, Tuscan, Provençal, Spanish—I can understand them all," said Gian dei Brughi, "and even a bit of Catalán; Bon dia! Bona nit! Está la mar molt alborotada!"

In half an hour Cosimo finished the book and lent it to Gian dei Brughi.

And so began the friendship between my brother and the brigand. As soon as Gian dei Brughi had finished a book, he would quickly return it to Cosimo, take another out on loan, hurry off to hide in his secret refuge, and plunge into reading.

Before, I used to get Cosimo books from the library of our house, and when he had read them he would give them back to me. Now, he began to keep them longer, as after he had read them he would pass them to Gian dei Brughi, and they often came back with their covers stained, with marks of damp, streaks of snails, from the places where the brigand had kept them.

Cosimo and Gian dei Brughi would arrange meetings on stated days on a certain tree, exchange books and go off, as the woods were always being searched by police. This simple operation was very dangerous for both of them; for my brother, too, who would certainly not have been able to justify his friendship with that criminal! But Gian dei Brughi was taken with such a longing to read that he would devour novel after novel, and, as he spent the whole day long reading, he would devour in one day certain tomes which my brother had spent a week over, and then he had to have another at once, and if it was not the day for their meeting he would rush all over the countryside searching for Cosimo, terrifying families in all the cottages and setting the whole police force of Ombrosa on the move.

Now, Cosimo, being always pressed by the bandit's demands, began to find that the books I got him were not enough, and he had to go and find other supplies. He knew a Jewish book-dealer named Orbecche, who also got him works in a number of volumes. Cosimo would go and knock at his window from the branches of a carob tree, bringing him hares, thrushes, and partridges he had shot, which he would exchange for books.

But Gian dei Brughi had his own special tastes; one could not give him just any book, or he would return it to Cosimo the next day to have it exchanged. My brother was at the age at which people begin to enjoy more serious reading, but he was forced to go slowly, as Gian dei Brughi had brought him back the Adventures of Telemachus, warning him that if he gave him such a dull book another time, he would saw the tree down from under him.

At this point Cosimo would have liked to separate the books which he wanted to read leisurely by himself, from those which he got only to lend the bandit. But this was impossible, for he had to read these over too, as Gian dei Brughi became more exacting and distrustful, and before taking a book he wanted Cosimo to tell him something about the plot, and made a great fuss if he caught him out. My brother tried to pass him some light novels; and the brigand came back furiously asking if he'd taken him for a woman. Cosimo never could succeed in guessing what he would like.

In fact, with Gian dei Brughi always at him, reading, instead of just being Cosimo's pastime for half an hour, became his chief occupation, the aim of his entire day. And what with handling the books, judging and acquiring them and getting to know of new ones, what with his reading for Gian dei Brughi and his own increasing need to read as well, Cosimo acquired such a passion for reading and for all human knowledge, that the hours from dawn to dusk were not enough for what he would have liked to read, and he, too, would go on by the light of a lantern.

Finally, he discovered the novels of Richardson. Gian dei Brughi liked these. Having finished one, he immediately wanted another. Orbecche got Cosimo a whole pile of volumes. The brigand now had enough to read for a whole month. Cosimo having found peace again, plunged into the Lives of Plutarch.

Gian dei Brughi, meanwhile, lying in his hiding place, his coarse red hair full of dried leaves and hanging down his wrinkled forehead, his green eyes growing red in the effort to see, was reading and reading, moving his jaws in a frenzied spelling motion, holding up a finger damp with saliva ready to turn the page. This reading of Richardson seemed to bring out a disposition long latent in him; a yearning for the cozy habits of family life, for relations, for sentiments known in the past, a sense of virtue and of dislike for the wicked and vicious. Nothing around him interested him any more, or it filled him with disgust. He never came out of his nest now, except to run to Cosimo to exchange a volume, particularly if it was a novel in many volumes and he had got to the middle of the story. And so he lived in isolation, without realizing the storm of resentment gathering around his head, even among the inhabitants of the wood who had once been his confidants and accomplices, but were tired now of an inactive brigand who still had the whole of the local police force after him.

In the past, around him had gathered all the locals who had fallen foul of the police, even in small ways: petty thieves such as the vagabonds, and tinkers, or real criminals, such as his bandit comrades. These people not only made use of his authority and experience for each of their thefts or raids, but also used his name as a cover, for it would go by word of mouth, and leave them unknown. And even those who did not take part in these operations drew advantage from their success, for the wood would fill with stolen goods and contraband of every kind which had to be disposed of or resold, and all those who trafficked round there did good business. And then anyone who did a job of thieving on his own account, unknown to Gian dei Brughi, would use that terrible name to frighten his victims and get more out of them; people lived in terror, thinking they saw Gian dei Brughi or one of his band in every evildoer they came across, and so loosen the strings of their purses.

These good times had lasted a long while; then gradually Gian dei Brughi found he could live on unearned income and draw apart more and more. It would all go on like this forever, he thought, instead of which things changed, and his name no longer inspired the reverence it had before.

What use was he, Gian dei Brughi, now? With him tucked away somewhere, bleary-eyed, reading novels, never doing a job, never getting any stuff, people couldn't go about their business quietly any longer, what with the police always around looking for him and arresting anyone at the slightest suspicion. Add the temptation of the price on Gian dei Brughi's head, and it is obvious the poor bandit's days were numbered.

Two other brigands, youths who had been taught by him and could not resign themselves to losing such a fine leader, decided to give him a chance to rehabilitate himself. They were named Ugasso and Bel-Lorè, and, as boys, had been in the band of fruit stealers. Now, as youths, they had become apprentice brigands.

So they went to see Gian dei Brughi in his cave. There he was, lying on the straw. "Yes, who is it?" he muttered, without raising his eyes from the page.

"We've an idea to discuss, Gian dei Brughi."

"Mmmmm . . . what idea?" and he went on reading.

"Do you know where Costanzo the exciseman's house is?"

"Yes, yes. . . eh? Who? What exciseman?"

Bel-Lorè and Ugasso exchanged an irritated look. If the brigand didn't take that accursed book from under his eyes, he wouldn't understand a single word they said. "Do shut that book a moment, Gian dei Brughi, and listen to us."

Gian dei Brughi seized the book with both hands, got up on his knees and made as if to hold it against his chest while keeping it open at the mark. Then the urge to go on reading was too much and, still holding it tight against him, he raised it enough to plunge his nose in again.

Bel-Lorè had an idea. He saw a cobweb with a big spider on it. Bel-Lorè raised the cobweb with the spider on top and threw it at Gian dei Brughi, between his book and his nose. And poor Gian dei Brughi had gone so soft he was even frightened of a spider. He felt the spider's legs tickling and the web sticking to his nose, and without even understanding what it was, gave a little yelp of disgust, dropped the book and began fanning his hands in front of his face, with starting eyes and dribbling mouth.

Ugasso swooped down and managed to seize the book before Gian dei Brughi could put a foot on it.

"Give me back that book!" said Gian dei Brughi, trying to free himself from spider and web with one hand, and tear the book from Ugasso's hand with the other.

"No, listen to us first!" said Ugasso, hiding the book behind his back.

"I was just reading Clarissa. Do give it back! I'd just reached a bit. . ."

"Listen to us. Tonight we're to take a load of wood to the exciseman's house. In the sack, instead of wood, there'll be you. When it's dark, you come out of the sack. . ."

"But I want to finish Clarissa!" He had managed to free his hands from the last remains of the cobweb and was struggling with the two youths.

"Listen to us . . . when it's dark, you come out of the sack, armed with pistols, get the exciseman to give you all the week's take, which he keeps in the coffer at the head of the bed . . ."

"Do just let me finish the chapter. . . pl-e-ease."

The two youths thought of the times when Gian dei Brughi used to plant a pair of pistols in the belly of anyone who dared contradict him. It gave them a twinge of nostalgia. "Well, you take the bags of money, d'you understand?" They went on sadly. "Bring 'em back to us, and we'll give you your book back, so's you can read to your heart's content. All right? You going?"

"No. It's not all right. I'm not going!"

"Ah, not going, aren't you . . . so you're not going . . . Well, we'll just see!" And Ugasso took a page toward the end of the book ("No!" screamed Gian dei Brughi), tore it out ("No, stop!"), crumpled it up and threw it in the fire.

"Ah! Swine! You can't do that! I shan't know how it ends!" And he ran after Ugasso to snatch the book.

"Are you going to the exciseman's then?"

"No, I'm not!"

Ugasso tore out another two pages.

"Stop! I haven't reached that yet! You can't burn them!"

Ugasso had already flung them in the fire.

"Swine! Clarissa! No!"

"Well, are you going?"

"I. . ."

Ugasso tore out another three pages and flung them in the flames.

Gian dei Brughi threw himself down with his head in his hands. "I'll go," he said. "But promise you'll wait with the book outside the exciseman's."

So the brigand was thrown in a sack with branches covering his head. Bel-Lorè carried the sack on his shoulders. Behind came Ugasso with the book. Every now and again, when Gian dei Brughi by a jerk or groan inside the sack seemed to be regretting his bargain, Ugasso let him hear the sound of a page being torn out, and Gian dei Brughi would calm down at once.

By this method they took him as far as the exciseman's, dressed up as colliers, and left him there. Then they went and hid a short way off, behind an olive tree, waiting for him to perform the robbery.

But Gian dei Brughi was in too much of a hurry, and came out of the sack before dark, when the place was still full of people.

"Up with your hands!" he called. But he wasn't the same man as before; he seemed to be seeing himself from the outside, and felt a little ridiculous. "Up with your hands, I said. Get against the wall, all of you . . ."

Oh dear, he didn't believe it himself. He was just acting. "Is this the lot?" He hadn't noticed that a child had escaped.

Well, there wasn't a minute to be lost on a job of that kind. But he dragged it out, the exciseman pretended to be stupid and not able to find the keys. Gian dei Brughi realized they were no longer taking him seriously and felt rather pleased at this deep down.

Finally, he came out, his arms loaded with bags of coins, and ran almost blindly toward the olive tree fixed as the meeting place.

"Here's the lot! Now give me back Clarissa!"

Four-seven-ten arms flung themselves around him, gripped him from shoulder to ankle. He was raised up bodily and tied like a sausage. "You'll see Clarissa behind bars!" and they took him off to prison.

The prison was a small tower beside the sea. A pine copse grew nearby. From the top of one of these pine trees, Cosimo could get quite near Gian dei Brughi's cell and see his face through the grate.

The brigand did not worry about his interrogation or trial. Whatever happened, his only worry was those empty days in prison without being able to read, with that novel left half finished. Cosimo managed to lay hands on another copy of Clarissa and took it up on the pine tree.

"What part did you get to?"

"The part where Clarissa is escaping from the brothel!"

Cosimo turned over a few pages. "Ah, yes, here we are. Well . . ." and facing the grate, on which he could see Gian dei Brughi's gripping hands, he began reading out loud.

The prosecution took a long time preparing its case. The bandit resisted the rack; it took days to make him confess each one of his innumerable crimes. So before and after the interrogations every day he would listen to Cosimo reading. When Clarissa was finished, Cosimo saw that Gian dei Brughi was rather sad, and it struck him that Richardson might be a little depressing to one shut up like that, so he decided to start on a novel by Fielding whose plot and movement might give him back a sense of his lost liberty. That was during the trial, and Gian dei Brughi could think of nothing but the adventures of Jonathan Wilde.

The day of execution came before the novel was finished. Gian dei Brughi made his last journey in the land of the living on a cart with a friar. Hangings at Ombrosa were from a high oak in the middle of the square. The whole population was standing around in a circle.

When his head was in the noose, Gian dei Brughi heard a whistle between the branches. He raised his face. There was Cosimo with a shut book.

"Tell me how it ends," said the condemned man.

"I'm sorry to tell you, Gian," answered Cosimo, "that Jonathan ends hanged by the neck."

"Thank you. Like me! Good-by!" And he himself kicked away the ladder and was strangled.

When the body ceased to twitch, the crowd went away. Cosimo remained till nightfall, astride the branch from which the hanged man was dangling. Every time a crow came near to peck at the corpse's eyes or nose, Cosimo chased it away with a wave of his cap.





} 13 {


FROM this time spent in the brigand's company Cosimo had acquired a passion for reading and study which remained with him for the rest of his life. The attitude in which we now usually found him was astride a comfortable branch with a book open in his hand, or leaning over the fork of a tree as if he were on a school bench, with a sheet of paper on a plank and an inkstand in a hole in the tree, writing with a long quill pen.

Now it was he who would go and look for the Abbé Fauchelefleur to give him lessons, to explain Tacitus or Ovid and the celestial bodies and the laws of chemistry. But the old priest, apart from a bit of grammar and bit of theology, was floundering in a sea of doubts and lack of knowledge, and at his pupil's questions he would open his arms and raise his eyes to the sky.

"Mon Abbé, how many wives can one have in Persia?" "Mon Abbé, who is the Savoyard Vicar?" "Mon Abbé, can you explain the system of Linnaeus?"

"Alors. . . Maintenant . . . Voyons. . ." the Abbé would begin, then hesitate and go no further.

But Cosimo, who was devouring books of every kind, and spending half his time in reading and half in hunting, in order to pay the bookseller's bills, always had some new story to tell him. Of Rousseau botanizing on his walks through the forests of Switzerland, or Benjamin Franklin trying to capture lightning with a kite, of the Baron de la Hontan living happily among the Indians of America.

Old Fauchelefleur seemed to listen to all this with surprised attention, whether from real interest or only from relief at not having to teach himself, I don't know; and he would nod and interject a "Non! Dites-moi!" when Cosimo turned to him and asked "Do you know how it is that. . .?" or with a "Tiens! C'est bien epatant!" when Cosimo gave him a reply; and sometimes a "Mon Dieu!" which could be either from exaltation at this new revelation of the greatness of God, or from regret at the omnipresence of Evil still rampant in the world under so many guises.

I was too much of a boy and Cosimo's only friends were illiterate—hence his need to comment on the discoveries he kept on making in books found an outlet in this spate of questions and rejoinders to the old tutor. The Abbé, of course, had the gentle accommodating outlook that comes from a higher understanding of the vanity of all; and Cosimo profited by it. Thus the relationship of pupil and teacher between the two was reversed. It was Cosimo who became the teacher and Fauchelefleur the pupil. And my brother was acquiring such authority that he even managed to drag the trembling old man behind him up into the trees. He made him spend an entire afternoon with his thin legs dangling from a chestnut tree, in the Ondariva gardens, contemplating the rare plants and the sunset reflected in the basins of the fountains and discussing monarchies and republics, the right and truth in various religions, Chinese rituals, the Lisbon earthquake, the Leyden jar, and Condillac's philosophy called sensationism.

I was supposed to have my Greek lesson with him and could not find the tutor. The whole family was alerted, the countryside was searched and even the fishing pond dragged for him, lest in a careless moment he had fallen in and got drowned. But back he came that evening, complaining of lumbago after all the hours he had spent sitting so uncomfortably.

It must not be forgotten, though, that this state of general passive acceptance by the old Jansenist alternated with momentary returns of his old passion for spiritual rigor. And if while in a careless and yielding mood he accepted without resistance any new or libertarian idea, such as the equality of all men before the law, or the honesty of primitive people, or the bad influence of superstitions, he would be assailed a quarter of an hour later by an excess of austerity and absolutism, and attack with all his need for coherence and moral severity the ideas he had accepted so lightly just before. On his lips, then, the duties of free and equal citizens or the virtues of natural religion became hard and fast dogmatic rules, articles of fanatical faith, beyond which he could only see a black picture of corruption; to him, then, all the new philosophers were far too bland and superficial in their denunciation of evil, for the way of perfection was arduous and left no room for compromises or halfway measures.

To these sudden about-faces of the Abbé, Cosimo did not dare say a word, for fear of being criticized for incoherence and lack of rigor, and the prolific world which he tried to create would die as if in some marble cemetery. Luckily, the Abbé would soon tire of this sustained mental effort and would sit there looking exhausted, as if this whittling away of every concept to its pure essence left him the prey of impalpable shadows; he would blink, give a sigh, turn the sigh to a yawn, and go back into his nirvana.

But between one and another of these habits of mind, he was now spending his entire days following the studies being pursued by Cosimo, shuttlecocking between the trees where Cosimo was perched and Orbecche's shop, ordering books from Amsterdam or Paris, and taking out those newly arrived. And thus he prepared the way for his own downfall. For the rumor reached the Ecclesiastical Tribunal that there was a priest at Ombrosa who read all the most forbidden books in Europe. One afternoon the police appeared at our house with orders to inspect the Abbé's cell. Among his brevaries they found the works of Bayle, still uncut, but this was enough for them to take him away.

It was a sad little scene, on that misty afternoon; I remember the dismay with which I watched it from the window of my room, and stopped studying the conjugation of Greek verbs, as there would be no more lessons. Old Abbé Fauchelefleur went off down the alley between the two armed ruffians, raising his eyes toward the trees; and at a certain point he staggered as if he wanted to run to an elm tree and climb up it, but had not the strength. Cosimo was hunting in the woods that day and knew nothing of it all; so they did not even say good-by.

We could do nothing to help him. Our father shut himself up in his room and refused all food for fear of being poisoned by the Jesuits. The Abbé spent the rest of his days going back and forth between prison and monastery in continual acts of abjuration, until he died, after an entire life dedicated to the faith, without ever knowing what he believed in, but trying to believe firmly until the last.

Anyway, the Abbé's arrest had no effect on the progress of Cosimo's education. And from that period dates his correspondence with the major philosophers and scientists of Europe, to whom he wrote in the hope that they might resolve his queries and objections, or perhaps just for the pleasure of discussion with superior minds and also the practice of foreign languages. It was a pity that all his papers, which he kept in a hollow tree trunk known only to himself, have never been found and must certainly by now be moldy or nibbled away by squirrels; there would be letters among them in the handwriting of the best known scholars of the century.

To keep his books Cosimo constructed a kind of hanging bookcase; sheltered as best he could from rain and nibbling mouths. But he would continuously change them around, according to his studies and tastes of the moment, for he considered books as rather like birds and it saddened him to see them caged or still.

On the strongest of these bookcases were ranged the tomes of Diderot and D'Alembert's Encyclopaedia as they reached him from a bookseller at Leghorn. And though recently all his living with books had put his head rather in the clouds and made him less and less interested in the world around him, now on the other hand reading the Encyclopaedia, and beautiful words like Abeille, Arbre, Bois, Jardin, made him rediscover everything around him as if seeing it for the first time. Among the books he sent for there began also to figure practical handbooks—for example, one on tree culture—and he found himself longing for the moment when he could experiment with his new knowledge.

Human labor had always interested Cosimo but, just like a bird, up till now his life in the trees, his constant movements and his hunting had been enough to satisfy his sporadic, incongruous urges. Now, on the other hand, he found coming over him a need to do something useful for his neighbor. And this too, if one analyzes it, was something he had learned from his friendship with the brigand—the pleasure of making himself useful, of performing some service necessary to other people.

He learned the art of pruning trees, and offered his help to the fruitgrowers, in winter, when the trees stuck out an irregular maze of twigs and seemed to long for a change to more ordered forms so as to cover themselves with flowers and leaves and fruit. Cosimo was good at pruning and charged little; so every owner or tenant of an orchard around would ask for his help, and he could be seen, in the crystalline air of those early mornings, standing with legs apart on low bare branches, his neck wrapped in a scarf to his ears, raising his shears and, clip! clip! off flew secondary branches and twigs under his sure touch. He did the same in gardens with trees planted for shade or ornament, which he would attack with a short saw, and in the woods, where instead of the woodsman's ax, whose only use was chopping down some ancient trunk completely, he would lop away with his swift hatchet only on the tops and upper branches.

In fact, his love for this arboreal element made him, as all real loves do, become merciless even to the point of hurting, wounding and amputating so as to help growth and give shape. Certainly he was always careful when pruning and lopping to serve not only the interests of the owner but also his own, as a traveler with a need to make his own routes more practicable; thus he would see that the branches which he used as a bridge between one tree and another were always saved, and reinforced by the suppression of others. And so, these trees of Ombrosa which he had already found so welcoming, now, with his newly acquired skill, he made more directly helpful, thus being at the same time a friend to his neighbor, to nature and to himself. The advantages of this wise work of his he was to appreciate above all at a much later period, when the shape of the trees made up more and more for his loss of strength. Then, with the advent of more careless generations, of improvident greed, of people who loved nothing, not even themselves, all was to change, and no Cosimo will ever walk the trees again.





} 14 {


IF THE number of Cosimo's friends grew, so did the number of his enemies. The vagabonds of the wood, in fact, after Gian dei Brughi's conversion to a love of literature and subsequent fall, had gone against him. One night my brother was sleeping in his leather bag hung on an ash tree in the wood, when he was awakened by the barking of the dachshund. He opened his eyes and saw a light. It came from down below. There was a fire right at the bottom of the tree and the flames were already licking the trunk.

A fire in the wood! Who could have set it going? Cosimo was quite certain he had never struck his flint that night. So it must have been those ruffians! They wanted to set the wood alight in order to get firewood and at the same time to put the blame on Cosimo and burn him alive.

At the moment Cosimo did not think of the danger which was threatening him so closely. His only thought was that the vast kingdom of paths and retreats which were his alone might be destroyed, and that was his only terror. Ottimo Massimo was already rushing away to avoid being burnt, turning around every now and again to give a desperate yelp. The fire was spreading in the undergrowth.

Cosimo did not lose heart. He had taken a variety of objects up in the ash tree which was then his refuge, and among these was a bottle full of barley water, to quench his summer thirst. He climbed to the bottle. Alarmed squirrels and bats were fleeing up the branches of the ash tree, and birds were flying away from their nests. He seized the bottle and was about to unscrew the cork and pour it over the trunk of the ash tree to save it from the flames, when he realized that the fire was already spreading to the grass, the dried leaves and bushes of the undergrowth, and would soon bum all the trees around. He decided to take a risk: "Let the ash bum! If I manage to wet the earth all around where the flames have not got to yet, I'll stop the fire!" And opening the top of the bottle he poured it down with a twisting, circular movement on to the farthest tips of fire, putting them out. And so the fire in the undergrowth found itself in the midst of a circle of damp grass and leaves, and could not spread any more.

From the top of the ash tree, Cosimo jumped down onto a beech nearby. He was only just in time. The trunk eaten away by fire at the base crashed down in a great funeral pyre amid the vain squeaks of squirrels.

Would the fire be limited to that point? Already hundreds of sparks and little flames were flying around; certainly the slippery barrier of wet leaves would not prevent its spreading! "Fire! Fire!" Cosimo began to shout at the top of his voice. "Fire!"

"Who's there? Who's shouting?" replied voices. Not far from the spot was a colliers' site, and a group of men from Bergamo—friends of his—were sleeping in a shack nearby.

"Fire! Fire!"

Soon the whole mountainside was resounding with the cry. The colliers scattered over the woods shouted it to each other in their incomprehensible dialect. They came running along from all directions. And the fire was subdued.

This first attempt at arson and the attack on his life should have warned Cosimo to keep clear of the wood. Instead of that he began going into the whole matter of controlling fires. It was the summer of a hot, dry year. In the coastal woods toward Provence, a huge fire had been burning for a week. At night its gleam reflected on the mountainside like the last of a sunset. The air was dry, trees and bushes like tinder in the drought. The wind seemed to be urging the flames in our direction, where occasional fires, either by chance or on purpose, would break out, joining the rest in a single belt of flame along the whole coast. Ombrosa was stunned by the danger, as if it were a fortress with a straw roof attacked by enemy incendiaries. The sky itself was charged with fire; every night shooting stars would fly all over the firmament and we would wait for them to fall right on us.

In those days of general dismay, Cosimo bought up a lot of barrels, filled them with water, and hoisted them up to the tops of the highest trees in strategic places. "One never knows, but this sort of thing's been useful once." Not content with this, he studied the courses of the streams crossing the woods, half dried up as they were, and found that their springs sent out only a trickle of water. Then he went to consult the Cavalier.

"Oh, yes," exclaimed Enea Silvio Carrega, clapping a hand to his forehead. "Reservoirs! Dykes! We must make plans!" and he broke out into little cries and jumps of enthusiasm with the myriad ideas crowding in his mind.

Cosimo set him to work at calculations and drawings, and meanwhile approached the owners of the private woods, the tenants of the public woods, the woodcutters, the colliers. All together, headed by the Cavalier (though the Cavalier did not come up to their heads, and was forced to direct them and not let his thoughts wander), with Cosimo superintending the work from above, they accumulated reserves of water in such a way that they could get pumps to every point where a fire might break out.

But this was not enough; squads of men had to be organized to put the fires out, groups who in case of alarm knew how to organize themselves at once into chains to pass buckets of water from hand to hand and halt the fire before it spread. So there appeared a kind of militia which took turns at guard and night inspection. The men were recruited by Cosimo among the peasants and artisans of Ombrosa. And at once, as happens in every association, there grew up a corporate spirit, a sense of competition between the groups. All felt capable of great things. Cosimo, too, felt a new strength and content. He had discovered his ability to bring people together and to put himself at their head—an aptitude which, luckily for himself, he was never called on to abuse, and which he used only a very few times in his life, always when there were important results to be carried out, and always with great success.

This he understood: that association renders men stronger and brings out each person's best gifts, and gives a joy which is rarely to be had by keeping to oneself, the joy of realizing how many honest decent capable people there are for whom it is worth giving one's best (while living just for oneself very often the opposite happens, of seeing people's other side, the side which makes one keep one's hand always on the hilt of one's sword).

So that was a good summer, the summer of the fires; there was a common problem which everyone, at heart, wanted to resolve, and each put it above every other personal interest, and all were repaid by the pleasure of finding themselves in agreement and mutual esteem with so many others.

Later Cosimo came to realize that when a problem in common no longer exists, associations are not as good as they were before, and it is better then to be a man alone and not a leader. But being a leader, meanwhile, he spent the nights all alone in the woods on sentry duty, up on a tree as he had always lived.

He had arranged a bell on the top of a tree which could be heard from a distance and give the alarm at the first glimmer of an incipient fire. By this system they managed to catch three or four fires in time, when they first broke out, and save the woods. The fires were attempts at arson, and the culprits were the two brigands Ugasso and Bel-Lorè, who were banished from the territory of the Commune. Rain set in at the end of August; the danger of fires had passed.

At that time one heard nothing but good said of my brother at Ombrosa. These favorable voices also reached our home—"How nice he is!"

"He really does know about some things"—in the tone of people wanting to make an objective judgment on someone of a different religion or another political party, and trying to show themselves so open-minded that they can even appreciate ideas far removed from their own.

The reactions of the Generalessa to this news were brusque and summary. "Are they armed?" she would ask, when they talked of the squads of guards against fires formed by Cosimo. "Do they go on maneuvers?" For she was already thinking of the formation of an armed militia which could, in case of war, take part in military operations.

Our father, on the other hand, would listen in silence shaking his head, so that it was difficult to understand if all these items of news about his son were painful to him or bored him, or flattered him in some way as if his one longing was a chance to hope in him again. This last must have been the right explanation, as a few days later he mounted his horse and went to look for him.

It was an open place, where they met, with a row of saplings around. The Baron rode up and down the row two or three times without looking at his son, though he had seen him. Jump by jump the boy moved down from the last tree until he got nearer and nearer. When he was facing Father he took off his straw hat (which took the place in summer of that cap of wildcat fur) and said: "Good day, my Lord Father."

"Good day, son."

"Are you in good health?"

"Considering my years and sorrows."

"I am pleased to see you so well."

"That is what I want to say to you, Cosimo. I hear that you are busying yourself for the common good."

"I hold dear the forest in which I live, Lord Father."

"Do you know that a part of the wood is our property, inherited from your poor grandmother, the late Lady Elizabeth?"

"Yes, my Lord Father. In the Belrio area there are thirty chestnuts, twenty-two ashes, eight pines, and a maple. I have copies of all the surveyors' maps, and it was as a member of a family owning woods that I tried to collect together all those with a common interest in preserving them."

"Ah yes," said the Baron, receiving this answer favorably. "But," he added, "they tell me that it is an association of bakers, market-gardeners and blacksmiths."

"Them too, Lord Father. Of all professions that are honest."

"Do you realize that you could lead noble vassals with the title of Duke?"

"I realize that when I have more ideas than others, I give those others my ideas, if they want to accept them; and that, to me, is leading."

"And to lead, nowadays, d'you need to be on a tree?" was on the tip of the Baron's tongue to say. But what was the use of bringing that up again? He sighed, absorbed in his thoughts, then loosened the belt on which his sword was hanging. "You are now eighteen years of age . . . It is time you considered yourself an adult . . . I no longer have long to live . . ." and he held out the sword flat on his two hands. "Do you remember you are the Baron of Rondò?"

"Yes, Lord Father, I remember my name."

"Do you wish to be worthy of the name and title you bear?"

"I will try to be as worthy as I can of the name of man, and also of his every attribute."

"Take this sword—my sword." The Baron raised himself in his stirrups. Cosimo stooped down on the branch and the Baron managed to strap the belt around his waist.

"Thank you, Lord Father . . . I promise I will make good use of it."

"Farewell, my son." The Baron turned his horse, gave a slight tug at the reins, and rode slowly away.

Cosimo stood there a moment wondering whether he ought not to salute him with the sword, then reflected that his father had given it to him as a defense not as an instrument of ceremony, and he kept it sheathed.





} 15 {


IT WAS at this time, when he began seeing a lot of the Cavalier, that Cosimo noticed something odd in his behavior, or rather something different from usual, whether odder or less odd. It was as if that abstracted air of his no longer came from a wandering mind, but from a fixed and dominating thought. He would often, now, have talkative moments; and though before, unsociable as he was, he never set foot in the town, now, on the other hand, he was always down at the port, mingling with groups or sitting on the pavements with old sailors and boatmen, commenting on the arrival and departure of ships and the misdeeds of the pirates.

Off our coasts there still cruised the feluccas of the Barbary pirates, molesting our traffic. Nowadays it was petty piratage, no longer as in the days when an attack by pirates meant one's ending as a slave at Tunis or Algiers, or losing nose and ears. Now when the Mohammedans managed to overtake a tartan from Ombrosa, they took only the cargo: barrels of dried fish, rounds of Dutch cheese, bails of cotton and the like. Sometimes our people were faster and would escape, firing a round of grapeshot at the felucca's rigging; and the Barbary sailors would reply by spitting, making lewd gestures and shouting insults.

In fact, it was just petty piracy, and went on because the pashas of those countries claimed certain credits from our merchants and shipowners, which they exhorted, as according to them they had not been properly treated, or even cheated, in some business deal or other. And so they tried to settle their accounts piecemeal by robbery while at the same time continuing their commercial transactions, with constant bickering and bargaining. So it was to neither side's interest to come to a definite break; and navigation hereabouts went on full of hazards and risks, without ever degenerating to tragedy.

The story I am about to tell was narrated to me by Cosimo in a number of different versions; I am keeping to the one which had the most details and was also the most logical. My brother when describing his adventures certainly added many out of his own head, but I always try to give a faithful report of what he told me, as he is the only source.

Well, one night Cosimo, who since that watching for fires had got into the habit of waking up at all hours, saw a light coming down into the valley. He followed it silently over the branches with his cat's tread, and saw Enea Silvio Carrega walking along very quietly, in his fez and robe, holding a lantern.

What was the Cavalier, who usually retired to bed with the chickens, doing up at that hour? Cosimo followed some distance behind. He was careful not to make any noise, even knowing too that his uncle, when walking along so concentratedly, was as good as deaf and saw only a few inches in front of his nose.

By mule paths and short cuts the Cavalier reached the edge of the sea, on a stretch of pebbly beach, and began to wave his lantern. There was no moon and nothing could be seen on the sea, except moving foam on the nearest waves. Cosimo was on a pine tree a little way from the shore, as at that level the vegetation petered out and it was not so easy to get about on branches. Anyway, he could see quite clearly the old man in his high fez on the deserted beach, waving his lantern toward the dark sea; and then suddenly from that darkness another lantern replied, very near, as if it had been lit that minute, and there emerged, moving very fast, a little boat with a dark square sail and oars—a different boat from the ones of these parts—coming toward the shore.

By the quavering light of the lantern, Cosimo saw men with turbans on their heads; some remained on the boat and kept it to the beach with little strokes of the oars; others landed, and they had wide swelling red pantaloons, and gleaming scimitars tied to their waists. Cosimo was all eyes and ears. His uncle and the Berbers talked among themselves, in a language which he could not understand but which he felt he almost could grasp, and must surely be the famous Lingua Franca. Every now and again Cosimo understood a word or two in our language, which Enea Silvio would emphasize, mingling these with other incomprehensible words, and the words in Italian were the names of ships, well-known sloops and brigantines belonging to the shipowners of Ombrosa, plying between our port and others nearby.

It didn't require much imagination to realize what the Cavalier must have been saying! He was informing the pirates about the times of arrival and departure of the Ombrosa boats, and about the cargoes they were carrying, their routes, and the weapons they had on board. And now the old man must have told them everything he knew, for he turned around and hurried away, while the pirates climbed back onto their boat and vanished into the dark sea. From the speed at which they talked he realized that they must have done this often before. Who knows how long those Berbers' attacks had taken place because of the information supplied by our uncle!

Cosimo stayed on the pine tree, incapable of tearing himself away from there, from the deserted shore. A wind was blowing, waves were gnawing at the beach. The tree groaned in all its joints and his teeth chattered, not from the cold air, but from the cold of his sad discovery.

So that timid and mysterious old man whom we, as boys, had always judged to be false and whom Cosimo had thought he had gradually learned to appreciate and understand was now revealed as a miserable traitor, an ungrateful wretch willing to harm his own country, which had taken him in when he was but driftwood after a life of errors. Had he been swept to such a point of nostalgia for countries and people where he must have found himself, for once in his life, happy? Or did he nurture a deep rancor against the home in which every mouthful he ate must have been one of humiliation? Cosimo was divided between the impulse to rush off and denounce him as a spy and so save our merchants' cargoes, and the thought of the pain it would cause our father, because of the affection which linked him so inexplicably to his half brother. Cosimo could already imagine the scene: the Cavalier manacled amid police, between two lows of Ombrosans cursing him, and so being led to the square having the noose put over his head, being hanged . . . After that night of watching over the dead body of Gian dei Brughi, Cosimo had sworn to himself that he would never again be present at an execution; and now he had to be the judge of whether to condemn to death one of his own relations!

This thought tortured him the whole night long and all of the next day too, as he moved endlessly from one branch to another, slipping, saving himself with his arms, letting himself slither on the bark, as he always did when preoccupied. Finally he made his decision; a compromise: to terrify both the pirates and his uncle, and put a stop to their criminal dealings without the intervention of the law. He would perch on that pine tree at night, with three or four loaded guns (by now he had collected an entire arsenal for his various hunting needs). When the Cavalier met the pirates he would begin firing one musket after another, making the bullets whistle over their heads. On hearing that firing, pirates and uncle would each make his own escape. And the Cavalier, who was certainly not brave, at the chance of being recognized and the certainty that his meetings on the beach were now watched, would be sure to break off relations with the Berber crew.

So Cosimo waited on the pine tree for a couple of nights, his muskets at the ready. And nothing happened. The third night, down came the old man in his fez, trotting along the pebbles of the beach, waving his lantern, and again a boat approached, with sailors in turbans.

Cosimo had his finger ready on the trigger, but did not fire, for this time everything was different. After a short colloquy, two of the pirates landed and signaled toward the boat and the others began unloading cargo: barrels, bales, sacks, demijohns, cases full of cheeses. There was not just one boat, but a number of them, all heavily loaded; and a row of porters in turbans began winding along the beach, preceded by our uncle, leading them with his hesitant steps to a cave among the rocks. There the Moors set down all those goods, certainly fruit of their latest piracies.

Why were they bringing this on shore? Later it was easy to reconstruct the circumstances. As the Berber felucca had to anchor in one of our ports (for some legitimate business, as was always going on between them and us in the middle of all their piracy) and therefore had to undergo a search by our customs, they had to hide their stolen goods in a safe place, so as to retrieve them on their return. In this way the men of the felucca would prove they had nothing to do with the latest robberies on the high seas, and strengthen their normal commercial relations with Ombrosa too.

All this was clear afterwards. At that moment Cosimo did not stop to ask himself questions. There was a pirate treasure hidden in a cave, the pirates were re-embarking and leaving it there; it must be moved as soon as possible. The first idea that crossed my brother's mind was to go and wake the merchants of Ombrosa, who were presumably the legitimate owners of the stuff. But then he remembered his collier friends starving in the woods with their families. He did not hesitate, but hurried off over the branches straight to where, around patches of gray beaten earth, the Bergamese were sleeping in rough shacks.

"Quick! Come on, all of you! I've found the pirates' treasure!" From under the tents and branches of the shacks came puffing, shuffling, cursing, and finally exclamations of surprise, and questions. "Gold? Silver?"

"I haven't seen properly . . ." said Cosimo. "From the smell, I'd say that there was a lot of stockfish and goat's cheese."

At these words all the men of the woods sprang to their feet. Those of them who had muskets snatched them up, others took hatchets, spits, spades, or stakes, but they all took some receptacle or other to put the stuff into, even broken coal hods and blackened sacks. A long procession started. "Hura! Hota!" Even the women went down with empty baskets on their heads, and the boys all hooded in sacks, holding torches. Cosimo went ahead from land pine to olive, from olive to sea pine.

They were just about to reach the other side of the rock, with the cave opening beyond, when on top of a twisted fig tree appeared the white shadow of a pirate, who raised his scimitar and shouted the alarm. A few leaps and Cosimo was on a branch above him. He pointed his sword at the man's back, till he jumped over the cliff.

In the cave a meeting of the pirate chiefs was taking place. (Cosimo, in all that coming and going of unloading, had not realized they had stayed behind.) Hearing the sentinel's cry they came out and found themselves surrounded by a hoard of men and women black with charcoal, hooded in sacks and armed with stakes. Baring their scimitars the Moors rushed forward to cut a way through. "Hura! Hota!" "Inshiallah!" The battle began.

The colliers were superior in number, but the pirates better armed. It's well known, though, that for fighting scimitars there's nothing better than stakes. Cling! Cling! And the Damascene blades withdrew all jagged at the edges. Their muskets, on the other hand, thundered and smoked, but to no purpose. Some of the pirates (officers, as could be seen) had lovely muskets, entirely embossed; but the tinder had got damp in the cave and wouldn't spark. Now some of the colliers began stunning the pirate officers by hitting them over the head with stakes, to get their muskets away from them. But with those turbans, every blow on the Berbers' heads was muffled as if by cushions; it was better to kick them in the stomach, as their midriffs were bare.

Seeing that the one weapon in good supply was stones, the colliers began flinging them in handfuls. The Moors, then, began throwing stones back. With this stone throwing, the battle eventually took on a more orderly aspect, but as the colliers were trying to enter the cave, attracted more and more by the smell of stockfish coming out of it, and the Berbers were trying to escape toward their tender still on the beach, there was no great reason to fight.

Then the Bergamese launched an assault to break into the cave. The Mohammedans were still resisting under hails of stones when they saw the way to the sea was free. Why go on resisting, then? Better hoist sails and be off.

On reaching the boat, three pirates, all nobles and officers, unfurled the sails. With a leap from a pine tree on the beach, Cosimo flung himself onto the mast, gripped the crossbar at the top, and from up there, hanging on by the knees, unsheathed his sword. The three pirates raised their scimitars. My brother, with slashes to right and slashes to left, kept all three at bay. The boat was still beached and wobbling now from side to side. At that moment the moon came out and glinted on the sword given by the Baron to his son, and on the Mohammedan blades. My brother slipped down the mast and plunged his sword into the breast of a pirate who was dropping overboard. Up he went again, swift as a lizard, defending himself with two parries from the others' slashes, slid down once more and thrust the sword through a second pirate, went up, had a short skirmish with the third, slid down and transfixed him too.

The three Mohammedan officers were lying half in the sea, their beards full of seaweed. The other pirates at the cave mouth were stunned with stones and blows from stakes. Cosimo was looking triumphantly around from the top of the mast, when from the cave, like a cat with its tail afire, leaped the Cavalier Carrega, who had been hidden there till now. He ran up the beach with head down, gave the boat one shove, which floated it away from the beach, jumped in, seized the oars and began rowing as hard as he could out to sea.

"Cavalier! What are you doing! Are you mad?" said Cosimo, gripping the mast. "Go back to shore! Where are we going?"

No answer. It was clear that Enea Silvio Carrega wanted to reach the pirate ship to save himself. Now his felony had been discovered once and for all, and if he stayed on shore he would certainly end on the gibbet. So he rowed and rowed, and Cosimo, though he still had his bared sword in his hand and the old man was disarmed and weak, was at a loss what to do next. At bottom he didn't want to do his uncle any harm at all, and, another thing, to reach him he would have to come right down the mast and this descent onto a boat was equivalent to descending to earth, and the question whether he had not already deviated from his unspoken inner laws by jumping from a tree with roots to the mast of a boat was too complicated to think out at that moment. So he did nothing and settled on top of the mast, his legs astraddle, moving off on the waves, while a slight wind swelled the sail, and the old man never stopped rowing.

He heard a bark. And started with pleasure. The dog, Ottimo Massimo, whom he had lost sight of during the battle, was crouching there at the bottom of the boat, and wagging his tail as if nothing unusual was happening. Oh, well, reflected Cosimo, there was not so very much to worry about; it was a family reunion, what with his uncle and his dog; and he was going on a boating trip, which after so many years of arboreal life, was a pleasant diversion.

The moon shone on the sea. Now the old man was tiring. He was rowing with difficulty, sobbing and saying again and again: "Ah, Zaira . . . ah, Allah, Allah, Zaira . . . Inshiallah. . . I" then he'd relapse into Turkish, repeating over and over again amid tears this woman's name which Cosimo had never heard.

"What are you saying, Cavalier? What's the matter with you? Where are we going?" he asked.

"Zaira . . . Ah, Zaira . . . Allah, Allah . . ." exclaimed the old man.

"Who is Zaira, Cavalier? Do you think you are going to Zaira this way?" and Enea Silvio Carrega nodded his head, and spoke in Turkish in between sobs, and called that name out to the moon.

Cosimo at once began to mull over suppositions about this Zaira. Perhaps the deepest mystery of that reserved and mysterious man was about to reveal itself. If the Cavalier, going toward the pirate ship, hoped to join this Zaira, she must then be a woman out there, in those Ottoman lands. Perhaps the whole of his life had been dominated by nostalgia for that woman, perhaps she was the image of the lost happiness which he had expressed by raising bees and tracing irrigation channels. Perhaps she was a mistress, a wife whom he had left over there, in the gardens of those lands beyond the seas, or perhaps she was really his daughter, a daughter whom he had not seen since she was a child, to find whom he had tried for years to establish contact with one of the Turkish or Moorish ships that came to our parts, until finally he had got news of her. Perhaps he had learned that she was a slave, and as a ransom they had suggested his informing on the movements of the Ombrosan tartans. Or perhaps it was a price he had to pay in order to be readmitted among them and embark for the country of Zaira.

Now, his intrigue discovered, he was forced to flee from Ombrosa, and now the Berbers could not refuse to take him with them and carry him back to her. In his panting snatches of talk were mixed accents of hope, of invocation, and also of fear; fear that this might still not be the right opportunity, or that some mischance might still separate him from the creature for whom he yearned.

He was just getting to the end of his rope in rowing when a shadow drew near—another Berber boat. Perhaps from the ship they had heard the sounds of battle on the shore, and were sending out scouts.

Cosimo slipped halfway down the mast, so as to hide behind the sail, but the old man began to shout in Lingua Franca for them to fetch him and take him to the ship, stretching out imploring arms. His petition was granted; two janissaries in turbans, as soon as they were within reach, took him up by the shoulders, light as he was, and pulled him onto their boat. The boat Cosimo was on got pushed away, the wind caught the sail, and so my brother, who had really felt he was done for this time, escaped discovery.

As the wind bore him away from the pirate boat, Cosimo heard voices raised as if in argument. A word said by the Moors, which sounded like "Marrano!" and the old man's voice repeating faintly, "Ah, Zaira!" left no doubts as to the Cavalier's reception. Certainly they held him responsible for the ambush at the cave; for the loss of their booty and the deaths of their men, and were accusing him of treachery. . .. A last shout, a plop, then silence. And to Cosimo came as clearly as if he heard it, the sound of his father's voice shouting, "Enea Silvio! Enea Silvio!" as he followed his half brother over the countryside; and Cosimo hid his face in the sail.

He climbed the yard again, to see where the boat was going. Something was floating in the midst of the sea as if carried by a current, an object, a kind of buoy, but a buoy with a tail. . . A ray of moonlight fell on it, and he saw that it was not an object but a head, a head stuck in a fez with a tassel, and he recognized the upturned face of the Cavalier looking up with his usual abstracted air and his mouth open; but below the beard the rest of him was in the water and could not be seen, and Cosimo shouted: "Cavalier! What are you doing? What are you doing? Why don't you get in? Catch hold of the boat! I'll help you in, Cavalier!"

But his uncle did not answer; he was floating, floating, looking up with that dismayed air as if he could see nothing. And Cosimo said: "Hey! Ottimo Massimo! Throw yourself in the water! Take the Cavalier by the nape of the neck! Save him! Save him!"

The obedient dog plunged in, tried to get his teeth into the old man's nape, did not succeed, and took him by the beard.

"By the nape, I said, Ottimo Massimo!" insisted Cosimo, but the dog raised the head by the beard and pushed it to the edge of the boat, and then it could be seen that there was no nape of neck any more; no body or anything, just a head; the head of Enea Silvio Carrega struck off by the stroke of a scimitar.





} 16 {


THE first version of the Cavalier's end, as given by Cosimo, was very different. When the wind brought the boat to the shore, with him clinging to the crossbar and Ottimo Massimo dragging the truncated head, he told the people who came hurrying to his call a very simple story (meanwhile he quickly moved into a tree with the help of a rope); that the Cavalier had been kidnapped by the pirates and then killed. Perhaps it was a version prompted by the thought of his father, who would be so struck down with sorrow at the news of his half brother's death and the sight of that pathetic relic that Cosimo lacked the heart to load him with the revelation of the Cavalier's felony too. In fact, afterwards, when he heard of the deep gloom into which the Baron had fallen, he tried to make up an imaginary glory for our natural uncle, inventing a secret and astute intrigue against the pirates to which the Cavalier had dedicated himself for some time and whose discovery had brought him to his death. But this account was contradictory and full of holes, also because there was something else that Cosimo wanted to hide, which was the unloading of the stolen goods by the pirates in the cave and the intervention of the colliers. For, if the whole story had been known, the entire population of Ombrosa would have gone into the woods to take their merchandise back from the Bergamese, and would have treated them as robbers.

After a week or so, when he was certain that the colliers had disposed of the goods, he told of the assault on the cave, and anyone who went up to try and recover their property came back with empty hands. The colliers had divided it all up into equal parts: the stockfish fillet by fillet, and with the sausages and cheeses, and all the rest they had made a great banquet which lasted all day.

Our father had aged very much, and sorrow over the loss of Enea Silvio had strange effects on his behavior. He was taken by a mania to prevent any of his brother's work being lost, so he insisted on looking after the beehives himself, and set to work with great ceremony, though he had never before seen a beehive close up. For advice he turned to Cosimo, who had learned something about them; not that he would ask him direct questions, but just draw the conversation on to apiculture, listen to what Cosimo said, and then repeat it as orders to the peasants in an irascible self-sufficient tone, as if it were all quite obvious. To the hives themselves he tried not to get too close for fear of being stung, but he was determined to conquer this phobia, and must have gone through agonies because of it. He also gave orders for certain watercourses to be dug, in order to carry out a project initiated by poor Enea Silvio; and had he succeeded it would have been an excellent thing, as his poor dear brother had never completed a single one.

This belated passion of the Baron for practical affairs lasted only a short time, alas. One day he was busying himself nervously among the beehives and watercourses when, at some brusque movement of his, a swarm of bees made for him. He took fright, began to wave his hands about, overturned a beehive, and rushed off with a cloud of bees behind him. He ran blindly, fell into the channel which they were trying to fill with water, and was pulled out soaking wet.

He was put to bed. What with a fever from the stings, and another from the wetting, he was in bed a week. Then he was more or less cured, but he went into such a decline that he never pulled up again.

He had lost the will to live and would stay in bed all day long. Nothing in his life had turned out as he hoped. No one mentioned the dukedom any more. His eldest son spent his whole life on trees even now that he was grown up; his half brother had been murdered; his daughter was far away and married into a family even more unpleasant than herself; I was too young to be anything of a companion; his wife too impulsive and hectoring. He began getting hallucinations that the Jesuits had taken over his house and would not allow him to leave his room, and so, bitter and bizarre as he had lived, he came to death.

Cosimo followed the funeral too, from one tree to another, but he could not enter the cemetery, as the branches of cypresses are too close together to climb. He watched the burial from beyond the cemetery wall and when we all flung a handful of earth on the coffin he threw down a small branch of leaves. We had all, I thought, been as far removed from my father as Cosimo was in the trees.

So now Cosimo was Baron of Rondò. There was no change in his life. He looked after the family interests, it is true, but always rather haphazardly. When the bailiffs and tenants wanted to find him they did not know where to look; and just when they least wanted him to see them, there he would be on a branch.

Partly in connection with estate matters, Cosimo was now more often seen in the town, perched on the big nut tree in the square or on the ilexes by the quays. The people treated him with great respect, called him "Lord Baron," and he came to take on certain attitudes of an older man, as young men sometimes do, and would sit there telling stories to groups of Ombrosians, clustered around the foot of the tree.

He would often describe our uncle's end, though never twice in the same way, and bit by bit he began to disclose the Cavalier's complicity with the pirates. But in order to prevent the immediate upsurge of indignation from all below, he at once added the story of Zaira, almost as if Carrega had confided it to him before dying; and eventually he even moved them to sympathy over the old man's sad end.

From complete invention, Cosimo, I believe, had arrived, by successive approximations, at an almost entirely truthful account of the facts. He told this two or three times; then finding his audience never tired of listening to the story and new listeners always coming and asking for details, he found himself making new additions, amplifying, exaggerating, and introducing new characters and episodes, so that the tale got quite distorted and became even more of an invention than it had been at first.

Cosimo now had a following which would listen open-mouthed to everything he said. He began to enjoy telling stories about his life on the trees, and his hunting, and the brigand Gian dei Brughi, and the dog Ottimo Massimo. They all became material for tales that went on and on and on. (Many episodes in this account of his life are taken from what he would narrate at the request of his rustic audience, and I mention this to excuse myself if not all I write seems likely or conforming to a harmonious view of humanity and fact.)

For example, one of the idlers would ask: "But is it true you have never once set foot off the trees, Lord Baron?"

And that would start Cosimo off. "Yes, once, but by mistake. I climbed the horns of a stag. I thought I was passing on to a maple tree, and it was a stag escaped from the royal game preserve, standing still at that particular spot. The stag felt my weight on its horns and ran off into the wood. You can imagine the state I was in. Up there I felt things sticking into me all over; what with the sharp points of the horns, the thorns, the branches hitting my face. . . The stag backed, trying to rid itself of me. I held on tight. . ."

There he would pause, and wait till the others asked: "And how did you get out of that, sir?"

And every time he would bring out a different ending. "The stag raced on and on, reached the herd, most of which scattered at seeing it with a man on its horns, while some came up from curiosity. I aimed the gun I still had slung over my shoulder and brought down every stag I saw. I killed fifty of 'em . . ."

"Have there ever been fifty stags round these parts?" asked one of those loiterers.

"It's extinct now, that breed. For those fifty were all does, d'you see? Every time my stag tried to get close to a doe, I fired and the animal fell dead. The stag simply did not know what to do next. Then. . . then it suddenly decided to kill itself, rushed on to a high rock and flung itself down. But I managed to cling on to a jutting pine tree, and here I am!"

Or he would tell how a fight had started between two of the stags with horns and at every clash he jumped from the horns of one to the horns of the other, till at a particular sharp butt he found himself tipped on to an oak tree . . .

In fact he was carried away by that mania of the storyteller, who never knows which stories are more beautiful—the ones that really happened and the evocation of which recalls a whole flow of hours past, of petty emotions, boredom, happiness, insecurity, vanity, and self-disgust, or those which are invented, and in which he cuts out a main pattern, and everything seems easy, then begins to vary it as he realizes more and more that he is describing again things that had happened or been understood in lived reality.

Cosimo was still at the age when the desire to tell stories makes one want to live more, thinking one has not done enough living to recount, and so off he would go hunting, and be away weeks, then return to the trees in the square, dangling by their tails polecats, badgers and foxes, and tell the folk of Ombrosa new stories, which originally true, became, as he told them, invented, and from invented, true.

But behind all this restlessness of his there was a deeper dissatisfaction, and in this need for listeners, a different lack. Cosimo did not yet know love, and what is any experience without that? What point is there in risking life, when the real flavor of life is as yet unknown?

Peasant girls and fishmongers used to pass through the square of Ombrosa, and young ladies in coaches, and Cosimo would look them sharply over from the trees, unable to understand why something that he was looking for was there in all of them, and not there completely in any one of them. At night, when the lights went on in the houses, and Cosimo was alone on the branches with the yellow eyes of the owls, he would begin dreaming of love. The couples who met behind bushes or amidst vines filled him with admiration and envy, and he would follow them with his eyes as they went off into the dark, but if they lay down at the foot of his particular tree, he would rush off in embarrassment.

Then, to overcome his shyness, he would stop and watch the love-making of animals. In the spring the world on the trees was a world of nuptials; the squirrels made love with squeals and movements that were almost human, the birds coupled with flapping wings; even the lizards slid off united, with their tails tight in knots; and the porcupines seemed to soften their quills to sweeten their embraces. Ottimo Massimo, in no way put off by the fact that he was the only dachshund in Ombrosa, would court big shepherd bitches, or police dogs, with brazen ardor, trusting to the natural sympathy this inspired. Sometimes he would return bitten all oven but a successful love affair was enough to repay for all defeats.

Cosimo, like Ottimo Massimo, was the only example of a species. In his daydreams, he would see himself courting girls of exquisite beauty; but how could he fall in love up in the trees? In his fantasies, he managed to avoid specifying where it would happen; on earth, or up in the element where he lived now: a place without a place, he would imagine; a world reached by going up, not down. Yes, that was it. Perhaps there was a tree so high that by climbing it, he would touch another world—the moon.

Meanwhile, as this habit of chattering in the square grew, he began to feel less and less satisfied with himself. And then, one market day, a man who came from the nearby town of Olivabassa exclaimed: "Ah, so you've got your Spaniard too, I see!" When asked what he meant, he replied: "At Olivabassa there's a whole tribe of Spaniards living on the trees!" Cosimo could not rest till he made the journey through the woods to Olivabassa.





} 17 {


OLIVABASSA was a town in the interior. Cosimo reached it after two days' journey and many a dangerous passage over the less wooded parts of the route. Whenever he passed near any houses, people who had never seen him before gave cries of surprise, and one or two of them even threw stones at him, so that he tried to move as inconspicuously as possible. But as he neared Olivabassa, he noticed that any woodman or ploughman or olive picker who saw him showed no surprise at all, in fact the men even greeted him by doffing their hats as if they knew him, and said words which were certainly not in the local dialect and sounded strange in their mouths, such as "Señor! Buenos días, Señor!"

It was winter; some of the trees were bare. In Olivabassa a double row of elms and plane trees crossed the town. And my brother, as he came nearer, saw that there were people up on the bare branches, one, two, or even three to each tree, sitting or standing in grave attitudes. In a few jumps he reached them.

There were men in noble garb, plumed tricorns, big cloaks; and noble-looking women too, with veils on their heads, sitting on the branches in twos and threes, some embroidering, and looking down on to the road now and then with a little sideways jerk of the bosom and a stretch of their arms along the branch, as if at a window sill.

The men bade him greetings that seemed full of rueful understanding: "Buenos días, Señor." And Cosimo bowed and doffed his hat.

One who seemed the most authoritative, a heavily built man wedged in the fork of a plane tree from which he appeared unable to extricate himself, with a liverish complexion through which his shaved chin and upper lip showed black shadows in spite of his advanced years, turned to his neighbor, a pale gaunt man dressed in black and also with cheeks blackish in spite of shaving, and seemed to be asking who was this unknown man coming toward them across the trees.

Cosimo thought the moment had come to introduce himself. He moved on to the stout gentleman's plane tree, bowed and said: "The Baron Cosimo Piovasco di Rondò, at your service."

"Rondòs?" exclaimed the fat man, "Rondòs? Aragonés? Galiciano?"

"No, sir."

"Catalán?"

"No, sir. I am from these parts."

"Desterrado también?"

The gaunt gentleman now felt it his duty to intervene and act as interpreter, very bombastically, with: "His Highness Federico Alonso Sánchez y Tobasco asks if your lordship is also an exile, as we see you climbing about on branches."

"No, sir. Or, at least, not exile by anyone else's decree."

"Viaja usted sobre los árboles pen gusto?"

And the interpreter: "His Highness Federico Alonso is gracious enough to ask if it is for pleasure that your lordship uses this mode of travel."

Cosimo thought a little, then replied, "I do it because I think it suits me, not because I'm forced to."

"Felíz usted!" exclaimed Federico Alonso Sánchez, sighing. "Ay de mi, ay de mi!"

And the man in black began explaining, more bombastically than ever: "His Highness deigns to say that your lordship is to be held fortunate in enjoying such a liberty, which we cannot but compare to our own restriction, endured, however, with resignation to the will of God," and he crossed himself.

And so, from Prince Sánchez' laconic exclamations and a detailed account by the gentleman in black, Cosimo succeeded in reconstructing the story of this colony living on plane trees. They were Spanish nobles who had rebelled against King Charles III about certain contested feudal privileges, and been exiled with their families as a result. On reaching Olivabassa they had been forbidden to continue their journey. Those parts, in fact, on account of an ancient treaty with His Catholic Majesty, could neither give hospitality nor even allow passage to persons exiled from Spain. The situation of those noble families was a very difficult one to cope with, but the magistrates of Olivabassa, who wanted to avoid any trouble with foreign chancelleries, but also had no aversion to these rich foreigners, came to an understanding with them. The letter of their treaty laid down that no exiles were to "touch the soil" of their territory; they only had to be up on trees, and all was in order. So the exiles had climbed up onto the elms and plane trees, on ladders supplied by the commune, which were then taken away. They had been roosting up there for some months, putting their trust in the mild climate, the hoped-for arrival of a decree of amnesty from Charles III, and Divine Providence. They were well supplied with Spanish doubloons and bought many supplies, thus giving trade to the town. To draw up the dishes they had installed a system of pulleys. And on other trees they had set up canopies under which they slept. In fact they had settled themselves very comfortably, or rather, the people of Olivabassa had settled them well, as it was to their advantage. The exiles, for their part, never moved a finger the whole day long.

It was the first time Cosimo had ever met other human beings living on trees, and he began to ask practical questions.

"And when it rains, what do you do?"

"Sacramos todo el tiempo, Señor."

Then the interpreter, who was Father Sulpicio de Guadalete, of the Society of Jesus, an exile since his Order had been banned in Spain, explained: "Protected by our canopies, we turn our thoughts to Our Lord, thanking Him for the little that suffices us. . ."

"Do you ever go hunting?"

"Con el visco, Señor, alguna vez."

"Sometimes one of us daubs a branch with glue, for amusement!"

Cosimo was never tired of finding out how they had resolved problems that he had had to deal with too.

"And washing, what d'you do about that?"

"Por lavar? Hay lavanedras!" said Don Federico, with a shrug of the shoulders.

"We give our linen to the washerwomen of the village," translated Don Sulpicio. "Every Monday, to be exact, we drop the dirty clothes basket."

"No, I meant washing your faces and bodies."

Don Federico grunted and shrugged his shoulders, as if this problem had never presented itself to him.

Don Sulpicio thought it his duty to interpret this: "According to His Highness's opinion, these are matters private to each one of us."

"And, I beg your pardon, but where d'you do your daily duties?"

"Ollas, Señor."

And Don Sulpicio, in his modest tone, said: "We use certain jars, in truth."

Taking his leave of Don Federico, Cosimo, with Father Sulpicio as guide, went on a round of visits to the other members of the colony, in their respective residential trees. All these hidalgos and ladies preserved, even in circumstances that were still of some discomfort, their usual manners and air of composure. Some of the men used horses' saddles to straddle the branches, and this appealed very much to Cosimo, who in all these years had never thought of such a system (stirrups—he noted at once—did away with the discomfort of having to keep the feet dangling, which brought on pins and needles after a bit). Others were pointing naval telescopes (one of them had the rank of admiral) which they probably only used to look at each other from one tree to another, in idleness and gossip. The ladies, old and young, all sat on cushions embroidered by themselves, sewing (they were the only ones doing anything at all) or stroking big cats. On those trees there were a great number of cats, as well as birds, in cages—perhaps they were victims of the glue—except for some free pigeons which came and perched on the hand of some girl, and were stroked longingly.

In this arboreal drawing room Cosimo was received with grave hospitality. They offered him coffee, then at once began talking of the palaces they had left behind in Sevilla, or Granada, and of their possessions and granaries and stables, and invited him to visit them when they were reinstated. Of the king who had banished them they spoke in a tone that was both of fanatical aversion and devoted reverence, sometimes being able to separate clearly the person with whom they had a family feud and the royal title from whose authority their own stemmed. Sometimes, on the other hand, they combined these two viewpoints in a single outburst; and Cosimo, every time the conversation fell on their sovereign, did not know where to look.

Over all the gestures and conversation of the exiles there hung an aura of mourning and gloom, which corresponded in part to their natures, in part to conscious determination—as sometimes happens to those struggling for a cause with a rather vague conviction, which they try to eke out by an imposing bearing.

In the girls—who at first glance all seemed to Cosimo a little hairy and sallow—there rippled a note of gaiety that was always bridled in time. Two of these were playing at shuttlecock from one tree to another. Tic tac, tic tac, then a little scream; the shuttlecock had fallen into the road. A beggar from Olivabassa gathered it up and threw it back for a fee of two pesetas.

On the last tree, an elm, was an old man, called El Conde, without a wig, and poorly dressed. Father Sulpicio, as he drew near, lowered his voice, and Cosimo found himself doing the same. El Conde was moving aside a branch with an arm every now and then and looking down over at the slope of the hill and a plain of bare green and gold merging into the distance.

Sulpicio murmured to Cosimo a story about one of his sons held in King Charles' prisons and tortured. Cosimo realized that while all those hidalgos were in a way acting the exile, and every now and again having to recall and repeat to themselves why they were there, this old man was the only one really suffering. This gesture of moving the branch as if waiting for another land to appear, this plunging of his gaze deeper and deeper into the undulating distance as if hoping never to see the horizon, but to succeed, perhaps, in making out some place, alas, far too far away—this was the first real sign of exile that Cosimo saw. And he understood, too, how much those other hidalgos must depend on El Conde's presence, as being the only thing that held them together, gave them a purpose. It was he, perhaps the poorest of them and certainly the least important of them back home, who told them what they should be suffering and hoping.

On his way back from these visits, Cosimo saw on an alder tree a girl whom he had not seen before. In a couple of leaps he joined her.

She was a girl with lovely eyes the color of periwinkles, and sweet-smelling skin. She was holding a bucket.

"How is it that when I saw everyone I never saw you?"

"I was drawing water at the well," and she smiled. From the bucket, which was a little askew, was dripping some water. He helped her to set it straight.

"So you get down from the trees?"

"No, there's a twisted old cherry tree whose branches hang over a courtyard wall. We drop our buckets from there. Come."

They went along a branch, and climbed the wall. She went first, as a guide over the cherry tree. Beneath was the well.

"Do you see, Baron?"

"How d'you know I'm a baron?"

"I know everything." She smiled. "My sisters told me of your visit at once."

"Those girls playing shuttlecock?"

"Irena and Raimunda, yes."

"The daughters of Don Federico?"

"Yes."

"And what's your name?"

"Ursula."

"You're much better at getting about trees than anyone else here."

"I've been on 'em since I was a child; at Granada we had huge trees in the patio."

"Can you pick that rose?" At the top of a tree was flowering a rambling rose.

"A pity, no."

"All right, I'll pick it for you." He went off and came back with the rose.

Ursula smiled and held out her hands.

"I want to pin it on myself. Tell me where."

"On my head, thank you." And she guided his hands.

"Now tell me," Cosimo asked, "d'you know how to reach that walnut tree?"

"Can one?" She laughed. "I'm not a bird."

"Wait." Cosimo threw her the end of a rope. "If you tie yourself to that rope, I'll swing you over."

"No . . . I'm afraid . . ." But she was laughing.

"It's my system. I've been traveling like this for years, doing it all by myself."

"Madre mía!"

He ferried her over. Then he came himself. It was a young walnut tree, not big at all. They were very close. Ursula was still panting and red from her flight.

"Frightened?"

"No." But her heart was beating fast.

"You haven't lost the rose." And he touched it to set it straight So, close together in the tree, their arms were around each other at every move.

"Uh!" said she; and then, he first, they kissed.

So began their love, the boy happy and amazed, she happy and not surprised at all (nothing happens by chance to girls). It was the love so long awaited by Cosimo which had now inexplicably arrived, and so lovely that he could not imagine how he had even thought it lovely before. And the thing most new to him was that it was so simple, and the boy at that moment thought it must be like that always.





} 18 {


THE peach and almond and cherry trees were in blossom. Cosimo and Ursula spent their days together on the trees. The spring even colored with gaiety the funereal proximity of her relatives.

My brother soon made himself useful among the colony of exiles, teaching them various ways of moving from one tree to another, and encouraging the grandees to abandon, for a moment, their habitual composure and practice a little movement. He also threw across some rope bridges, which allowed the older exiles to pay each other visits. And so, during the year, almost, that he spent with the Spaniards, he gave the colony many devices invented by himself: water tanks, ovens, bags of fur to sleep in. It was his joy in new inventions that made him help those hidalgos in their habits, even though they in no way agreed with the opinions of his favorite authors; thus, seeing the desire of those pious persons to go regularly to confession, he scooped out a confessional from a tree trunk, in which the lanky Don Sulpicio could insert himself and through a little curtained grating listen to their sins.

The pure passion for technical innovation, in fact, was not enough to save him from paying homage to accepted forms; ideas were needed. Cosimo wrote to Orbecche, the bookseller, to send him by the post from Ombrosa to Olivabassa some volumes that had arrived meanwhile. So he was able to read out loud to Ursula Paul et Virginie and La Nouvelle Héloïse.

The exiles would often hold meetings on a big oak tree, parliaments in which they drafted letters to their sovereign. At first, these letters must always have had a tone of indignation, protest and threat, almost of ultimatum; but gradually one or another of them proposed formulas that were blander and more respectful, and eventually they drafted a petition in which they prostrated themselves humbly at His Gracious Majesty's feet and implored his forgiveness.

Then El Conde rose. All were silent. El Conde, looking up, began speaking in a low vibrant voice, and said everything that he had in his heart. When he sat down again, the others were serious and mute. No one mentioned the petition any more.

Cosimo had by now become one of the community and took part in the discussions. And there, with ingenious youthful fervor, he would explain the ideas of philosophers and the wrongdoings of sovereigns, and how states could be governed by justice and reason. But the only ones among them who listened at all were El Conde, who though old, was always searching for new ways of understanding and acting; Ursula, who had read a few books; and a couple of girls who were rather more wide awake than the others. The rest of the colony had heads like leather soles, fit only to drive nails into.

In fact, El Conde now began to want to read books instead of spending his time brooding over the landscape. Rousseau he found a little crude, but he liked Montesquieu; it was a first step. The other hidalgos read nothing, though one or two of them secretly asked Father Sulpicio to get Cosimo to lend them La Pucelle so they could go off and read the more risqué passages. So, with El Conde chewing over his new ideas, the meetings on the oak tree took on a new turn; there was even talk of going off to Spain and starting a revolution.

At first, Father Sulpicio did not sense the danger. He was not a man of great subtlety himself, and being cut off from all the hierarchy of his superiors he was no longer in touch with the way people's minds were being poisoned these days. But as soon as he was able to reorder his ideas (or as soon, said others, as he received certain letters with the bishop's seal) he began to say that the devil had insinuated itself into that community of theirs and that they would bring a hail of lightning down on themselves "which would burn up the trees with everyone on them."

One night Cosimo was awakened by a groan. He hurried toward it with a lantern and on El Conde's oak tree saw the old man bound to the trunk with the Jesuit tightening the knots. "Stop, Father! What are you doing?"

"The arm of the Holy Inquisition, son! Now it is for this wretched old man to confess his heresy and spit out the devil. Then it will be your turn."

Cosimo drew his sword and cut the ropes. "En garde, Father! There are other arms which serve reason and justice!"

The Jesuit drew a naked sword from his cloak. "Baron of Rondò, for some time your family has had accounts to settle with my Order!"

"He was right, my poor old father," exclaimed Cosimo, as the steel crossed. "The Society does not forgive!"

They fought, swaying about on the trees. Don Sulpicio was an excellent fencer, and my brother very often found himself in difficulties. They were at the third round when El Conde pulled himself together and began to call out. The other exiles woke, hurried to the spot, and intervened. Sulpicio put his sword away at once, and, as if nothing had happened, at once began calling for calm.

An event so serious would have been impossible to silence in any other community, but not in that, considering their wish to reduce all thought in their heads to a minimum. So Don Federico offered his good offices, and a kind of reconciliation was arranged between Don Sulpicio and El Conde, which left everything as it had been before.

Certainly Cosimo had to be careful, and when he went about the trees with Ursula he was in constant fear of being spied on by the Jesuit. He knew that their relationship was worrying Don Federico, for the girl was no longer allowed out with him. Those noble families, in truth, were accustomed to a very strict moral code; but they were on the trees there, in exile, and did not worry so much any longer about such things. Cosimo seemed to them a fine young man, with a title too, and one who knew how to make himself useful, and who stayed there with them of his own free will; and if there did happen to be a tenderness between him and Ursula and they often saw them going off among the trees looking for fruit and flowers, they shut an eye so as not to find anything to criticize.

Now, however, with Don Sulpicio putting pressure on him, Don Federico could no longer pretend to know nothing. He called Cosimo to an audience on his plane tree. At his side was the long black figure of Sulpicio.

"Baron, you are often seen about with my niña, they tell me."

"She is teaching me to speak vuestra idioma, Your Highness."

"How old are you?"

"Almost diez y nueve."

"Joven! Too young! My daughter is of marrying age. Why do you go about with her?"

"Ursula is seventeen."

"Are you thinking already of casarte?"

"Of what?"

"My daughter teaches you Spanish badly, hombre. I mean if you are thinking of choosing yourself a novia, of setting up a home."

Sulpicio and Cosimo both moved their hands forward. The conversation was taking a turn desired neither by the Jesuit nor, even less, by my brother.

"My home . . ." said Cosimo, waving a hand toward the highest branches and the clouds, "my home is everywhere, everywhere I can climb to, upwards . . ."

"No es esto," and Prince Federico Alonso shook his head. "Baron, if you care to visit Granada when we return, you will see the richest fief in the Sierra. Mejor que aqui."

Don Sulpicio could contain himself no longer. "But, Highness, this young man is a follower of Voltaire . . . He must not go about in your daughter's company . . ."

"Oh, es joven, he's young, ideas come and go, que se case, let him marry and they'll change, now come to Granada, do."

"Muchas gracias a usted. . . I'll think it over. . ." And Cosimo, twiddling his cap of cat's fur in his hands, withdrew with many a bow.

When he saw Ursula again he was very preoccupied. "You know, Ursula, your father talked to me about you . . . He broached certain subjects . . ."

Ursula looked alarmed. "You mean he doesn't want us to see each other any more?"

"No, not that. . . When you are no longer exiled, he wants me to come with you to Granada . . ."

"Ah, yes! How nice!"

"But, you see, though I love you, I've always lived on the trees, and I want to stay on them . . ."

"Oh, Cosimo, we've got lovely trees too . . ."

"Yes, but meanwhile I'd have to come down to earth for the journey, and once down . . ."

"Don't worry now, Cosimo. We're exiles, anyway, for the moment and may so remain for the rest of our lives."

And my brother ceased to think about it.

But Ursula had guessed wrong. Shortly afterwards, a letter with the royal seal on it reached Don Federico. By gracious clemency of His Catholic Majesty, the ban was revoked. The noble exiles could return to their own homes and their own fiefs. At once there was a great coming and going among the plane trees. "We're returning! We're returning! Madrid! Cádiz! Cádiz!"

The news soon spread to the town. The inhabitants of Olivabassa arrived with ladders. Some of the exiles descended amid acclamations, others stayed to collect their luggage.

"But it's not over!" El Conde kept on saying. "The cortes will hear of it! And the Crown!" but as none of his companions in exile showed any desire to agree with him at that moment, and already the ladies were thinking only of their dresses which were now out of fashion and of their wardrobes to be renewed, he began to make speeches to the population of Olivabassa. "Now we're going to Spain and then you'll see! We'll settle our accounts there. I and this young man here will get justice!" and he pointed to Cosimo. Cosimo, confused, made signs of disagreement.

Don Federico, earned by many hands, had descended to earth. "Baja, joven bizarro!" he shouted to Cosimo. "Come down, you gallant young man! Come with us to Granada!"

Cosimo was crouching on a branch, reluctant to move.

And the Prince went on: "Why not? You'll be like a son to me!"

"The exile is over," said El Conde. "Finally we can put into operation what we have brooded on for so long! Why stay up there on the trees, Baron? There's no reason now."

Cosimo stretched out his arms. "I came up here before you, my lords, and here I will stay afterwards too!"

"You want to withdraw!" cried El Conde.

"No, to resist," replied the Baron.

Ursula, who had been among the first to go down, and with her sisters was busy filling a coach full of luggage, rushed toward the tree. "Then I'll stay with you! I'll stay with you!" and she began running up the ladder.

Four or five of the others stopped her, tore her away, took the ladders from the trees.

"Adiós, Ursula, be happy!" said Cosimo as they carried her forcibly to the coach, which then set off.

There was a gay barking. The dachshund, Ottimo Massimo, who had snarled with discontent all the time his master had been at Olivabassa, seemed finally happy again. He began to chase, just as a joke, the little cats left behind and forgotten on the trees, and they bristled their fur and hissed at him.

The exiles departed, some on horseback, some by coach. The road cleared. No one remained on the trees of Olivabassa but my brother. Stuck on the branches here and there was some feather or ribbon or scrap of lace fluttering in the wind, and a glove, a fringed parasol, a fan, a spurred boot.





} 19 {


IT WAS a summer—all full moons, croaking frogs, twittering chaffinches—when the Baron was seen at Ombrosa once again. He seemed restless as a bird too, hopping from branch to branch, frowning, inquisitive, indecisive.

Soon there began to circulate rumors that a certain Cecchina, on the other side of the valley, was his mistress. This girl certainly lived in an isolated house, with a deaf aunt, and an olive branch did pass near her window. The idlers in the square discussed whether she was or not.

"I saw them, she at the window sill, he on the branch. He was fluttering his arms, like a bat, and she was doubled up with laughter!"

"Later on he jumps in!"

"Nonsense; he's sworn never to leave the trees for his whole life. . ."

"Well, he's set the rule, he can also allow the exceptions . . ."

"Eh, if we're talking about exceptions . . ."

"No, no; it's she who jumps out of the window onto the olive!"

"How do they set about it then? They must be very uncomfortable . . ."

"I say, they've never touched each other. Yes, he courts her, or maybe it's her who's leading him on. But he'll never come down from up there . . ."

Yes, no, he, she, sill, jump, branch . . . the discussions seemed endless. Betrothed youths and husbands, now, reacted at once if their girls or wives as much as raised eyes toward a tree. The women, on their side, would chatter away as soon as they met; what were they talking about? Him.

Whether it was Cecchina or anyone else, my brother had his love affairs without ever leaving the trees. Once I met him running over the branches with a mattress slung over his shoulder, as easily as he slung guns, ropes, hatchets, water flasks or powder horns.

A certain Dorothea, a courtesan, admitted to me that she had met him, on her own initiative and not for money, but just to get an idea.

"And what idea did you get?"

"Eh! I'm quite satisfied . . ."

Another, a certain Zobeide, told me she had dreamed of the "man on the trees" (as they called him) and this dream was so detailed, so remarkably well informed, that I think she must have lived it in reality.

Well, I don't know how those stories got about, but Cosimo must certainly have had a fascination for women. Since he had been with the Spaniards he had begun to take more care of his appearance, and had stopped going around muffled in furs like a bear. He wore stockings and a tapered coat and a tall hat in the English fashion, shaved his beard and combed his wig. In fact, one could tell for sure now, from his dress, whether he was going off on a hunting expedition or to a rendezvous.

The story goes that a mature and noble lady whose name I will not give, as she was from Ombrosa (her sons and grandsons still live here and might be offended, but at that time it was a well-known story), always used to go about in a coach, alone, with an old coachman on the box, and had herself driven over a part of the main road which passed through the wood. At a certain point she would say to the coachman: "Giovita, the wood is simply chockful of mushrooms. Get down, will you. Fill this and then come back," and she would hand him a big basket. The poor man, racked with rheumatism, got down from the box, loaded the basket on his shoulders, went off the road and began searching among the ferns in the dew, and got deeper and deeper into the beechwood, bowing down under every leaf to find a parasol mushroom or a puffball. Meanwhile, the noble lady would vanish from the coach, as if swept up to heaven, into the thick boughs overhanging the road. No more is known, except that often people passing by would find the coach standing there empty in the wood. Then, as mysteriously as she had vanished, there was the noble lady sitting in the coach again, looking languid. Giovita would return, soaking, with a few mushrooms at the bottom of the basket, and they would set off again.

Many of these stories were told at the house of five Genoese ladies who gave parties for rich young men (I frequented them myself when I was a bachelor), and that's how these ladies were suddenly taken with the whim to visit the Baron. A certain oak tree, in fact, is still called the Oak of the Five Sparrows, and we old men know what that means. The tale comes from a certain Gé, a raisin merchant, a man whom one can believe. It was a fine sunny day, this Gé; was out shooting in the wood, he reached the oak tree, and what did he see? Cosimo had taken all five of them up on to the branches, and there they were, one here and one there, enjoying the warm afternoon, quite naked, with their little umbrellas open so as not to catch the sun, and the Baron in the midst of them reading Latin verses, Gé could not make out whether by Ovid or Lucretius.

So many stories were told of him, and what truth there was in them I don't know. At that time he was rather reserved and coy about these things; but, as an old man, he would tell many stories, almost too many—most of them, though, so fantastic that he could not thread his way through them himself. The fact was that people got into the habit, when a girl was pregnant and no one knew who was responsible, of finding it easiest to blame him. Once a girl described how as she was going picking olives she felt herself raised up by two long arms like a monkey's . . . Shortly afterwards she had twins. Ombrosa became filled with bastards of the Baron, real or false. Now they are all grown up and some, it is true, do resemble him; but this could also have been due to the power of suggestion, as when pregnant women saw Cosimo suddenly jumping from one branch to another, they were apt to get a turn.

Myself, I don't believe most of these stories told to explain certain births. Nor do I know if he had relations with as many women as they say, but what is sure is that those who had known him preferred to be silent about him.

And then, if he did have so many women after him, how can one explain the moonlight nights when he wandered like a cat on the fig trees, plums and quinces around the village, in the orchards overlooking the outer circle of the houses of Ombrosa; and there he would lament, with sighs, or yawns, or groans, which, however much he tried to control and render into normal sounds, usually came out of his throat as wails or growls. And the people of Ombrosa, who knew his habits, were not even alarmed when they heard all this in their sleep; they would just turn in bed and say, "There's the Baron out for a woman. Let's hope he finds one and we can sleep."

Sometimes an old man, one of those who suffer from insomnia and are quite ready to go to the window if they hear a noise, would look out into the orchard and see Cosimo's shadow among the branches of the fig trees, thrown on the ground by the moon. "Can't you get to sleep tonight, your Lordship?"

"No, the more I toss and turn, the more awake I feel," Cosimo would say, as if talking from his bed, with his face deep in the pillows, longing to feel his eyelids droop, while in fact he was hanging suspended there like an acrobat. "I don't know what it is tonight, the heat, nerves; perhaps the weather is going to change, don't you feel it too?"

"Oh, I feel it, I feel it. . . but I'm old, your Lordship. You, on the other hand, have a pull at your blood. . ."

"Yes, it does pull. . ."

"Well, try and get it to pull a little farther away, Lord Baron, as there's nothing here to give you any relief; only poor folk who have to wake at dawn and want to sleep now. . ."

Cosimo did not answer. He just rustled off into the orchard. He always knew how to keep within decent limits, and on their side the people of Ombrosa always knew how to tolerate these vagaries of his; partly because he was always the Baron and partly because he was a different Baron from others.

Sometimes those animal calls of his reached other windows, ears more curious to hear; the lighting of a candle, the sound of muffled laughter, of feminine murmurs in the shadows were certainly meant as jokes on him, or mimicking him. And yet it was already something serious, almost a love call to this human derelict jumping about branches like a werewolf.

And now one of the more shameless girls would come to the window as if to see what was outside, still warm from her bed, her breasts showing, her hair loose, a white smile between her strong lips. Then a conversation would ensue.

"Who is it? A cat?"

And he: "It's a man, a man."

"A man meowing?"

"No, sighing."

"Why? What's up?"

"Something's up . . ."

"What?"

"Come here and I'll tell you . . ."

But he never got insults from the men, nor were there any vendettas—signs, it seems to me, that he was never as dangerous as all that. Only once, mysteriously, was he wounded. The news spread one morning. The Ombrosa doctor had to clamber up on to the nut tree where he was moaning away. He had a leg full of grapeshot, the little ones used to shoot sparrows with; they had to be taken out one by one with pincers. This hurt, but he soon recovered. It was never quite known how this had happened; he said that he had been hit by mistake while climbing a branch.

Convalescent, immobilized in the nut tree, he plunged into serious study. At that time he began to write a Project for the Constitution of an Ideal State in the Trees, in which he described the imaginary Republic of Arborea, inhabited by just men. He began it as a treatise on laws and governments; but as he wrote, his impulse to invent complicated stories intervened and out poured a rough sketch of adventures, duels and erotic tales, the latter inserted in a chapter on matrimonial rights. The epilogue of the book should have been this: the Author, having founded the perfect state in the treetops and convinced the whole of humanity to establish itself there and live there happily, came down to inhabit the earth, which was now deserted. This is what it should have been, but the work remained incomplete. He sent a précis to Diderot, signing it simply: "Cosimo Rondò, Reader of the Encyclopaedia." Diderot thanked him with a short note.





} 20 {


I CANNOT say much of that period, because it was the time of my first journey into Europe. I was a young man and could make whatever use I liked of the family patrimony, as my brother needed very little. The same was true of my mother, who had been getting very much older recently, poor dear. My brother had asked to sign a power of attorney in my favor over all our possessions, on the condition that I give him a monthly allowance pay his taxes, and keep his affairs in order. All I had to do was to take over direction of the estate and choose myself a wife, and already I saw ahead of me that regulated and pacific life which, in spite of all the great upheavals at the turn of the century, I have succeeded, in fact, in living.

But before starting this, I allowed myself a period of travel. I also went to Paris, just in time to see the triumphant reception of Voltaire on his return there after many years, for the staging of one of his plays. But these are not the memoirs of my life, which would not be worth writing; I only mention this journey, because everywhere I went I was struck by the fame of the tree-climbing man of Ombrosa, in foreign countries too. Once in an almanac I saw a figure with the words beneath: "L'homme sauvage d'Ombreuse (Rep. Génoise). Vit seulement sur les arbres."

They had represented him all covered in leaves, with a long beard and a long tail, eating a locust. This figure was in the Chapter of Monsters, between the Hermaphrodite and the Siren.

When faced with this kind of fantasy I was usually careful not to reveal that the man was my brother. But I proclaimed it very loud when I was invited to a reception in honor of Voltaire in Paris. The old philosopher was in his armchair, surrounded by a court of ladies, gay as a cricket and prickly as a porcupine. When he heard I came from Ombrosa he addressed me thus: "Is it near you, mon cher Chevalier, that there is that famous philosopher who lives on the trees comme un singe?"

And I, flattered, could not prevent myself replying: "He's my brother, Monsieur, le Baron de Rondeau."

Voltaire was very surprised, perhaps partly at finding the brother of such a phenomenon apparently so normal, and began asking me questions, such as: "But is it to be nearer the sky that your brother stays up there?"

"My brother considers," answered I, "that anyone who wants to see the earth properly must keep himself at a necessary distance from it," and Voltaire seemed to appreciate this reply.

"Once it was only Nature which produced living phenomena," he concluded. "Now 'tis Reason." And the old sage plunged back into the chatter of his theistic adorers.

Soon I had to interrupt my journey and return to Ombrosa, recalled by an urgent dispatch. Our mother's asthma had suddenly got worse and the poor woman could no longer leave her bed.

When I crossed the threshold and raised my eyes toward our house I was sure I would see him there. Cosimo was crouching on a high branch of a mulberry tree just outside the sill of our mother's bedroom. "Cosimo," I called, but in a muffled voice. He made me a sign which meant both that our mother was rather better but still in bed, and that I should come up quietly.

The room was in shadow. My mother lay in bed with a pile of pillows propping up her shoulders, and she seemed larger than I had ever seen her. Around her were a few women of the house. Battista had not yet arrived, as the Count her husband, who was to accompany her, had been held back for the vintage. In the shadow of the room glowed the open window in which Cosimo was framed on the branch of a tree.

I bent down to kiss our mother's hand. She recognized me at once and put her hand on my head. "Ah, so you have arrived, Biagio . . ." She spoke in a faint voice when the asthma did not grip her throat too much, but clearly and with great feeling. What struck me, though, was hearing her addressing both of us, Cosimo and myself, as if he were at her bedside too. And Cosimo answered her from the tree.

"Is it long since I took my medicine, Cosimo?"

"No, only just a few minutes, Mother. Wait before you take more, as it won't do you any good just now."

At a certain point she said, "Cosimo, give me a sliver of orange," and I felt surprised. But I was even more surprised when I saw Cosimo stretching into the room through the window a kind of ship's harpoon and with it pick up a sliver of orange which was put into our mother's hand.

I noticed that for all these little services she preferred to turn to him.

"Cosimo, give me my shawls."

And he with his harpoon would search among the things thrown on an armchair, take up the shawls and hand them to her. "Here they are, Mother."

"Thank you, Cosimo, my son." She always spoke as if he were only a yard or two away, but I noticed that she never asked him services which he could not do from the tree. In such cases she always asked either me or the women.

At night our mother could not sleep; Cosimo remained watching over her from the tree with a little lantern hanging on the branch so that she could see him also in the dark.

The morning was the worst time for her asthma. The only remedy was to try and distract her, and Cosimo played little tunes on a flute or imitated the song of the birds, or caught butterflies and then made them fly into the room, or made festoons of wisteria.

It was a day of sunshine. Cosimo with a reed began to blow soap bubbles from the tree and puff them through the window toward the sick woman's bed. Our mother saw those iridescent colors flying and filling the room and said: "Oh, what games you are playing." This made me think of when we were little children and she always disapproved of our games as being too futile and infantile, but now, perhaps for the first time, she was enjoying our games. The soap bubbles even reached her face, and she would burst them with a puff and a smile. A bubble even reached her lips and stayed there intact. We bent down over her. Cosimo let the reed fall. She was dead.

Mourning is followed sooner or later by happy events; it is the law of life. A year after our mother's death I became engaged to a girl from the local nobility. It was very difficult to bring my fiancée around to the idea of coming to live at Ombrosa; she was afraid of my brother. The thought that there was a man moving among the leaves who was watching every move through the windows, who would appear when least expected, filled her with terror. Then too, she had never seen Cosimo and imagined him as some kind of Indian. To get this fear out of her head I arranged a luncheon in the open, under the trees, to which Cosimo was also invited. Cosimo ate above us on an ilex tree, with his dishes on a little tray, and I must say that although he was rather out of practice for social dining, he behaved very well. My fiancée was somewhat calmed, and realized that apart from his being on the trees he was a man just like all the others; but she was still left with an unconquerable feeling of distrust.

Even when, after we had married, we settled down together in the villa at Ombrosa, she avoided as much as possible not only any converse, but even the sight of her brother-in-law, although he, poor man, every now and again would bring her bunches of flowers and rare furs. When children began to be born and grow up, she got it into her head that their uncle's proximity would have a bad influence on their education. She was not happy until we put in order the old castle on our estate at Rondò which had been uninhabited for a long time; and we began staying up there much more than at Ombrosa, so that the children should be away from bad influences.

Cosimo too began to notice the passing of time: a sign of this was the aging of the dachshund Ottimo Massimo, who had lost his desire to join the bitches of the pack to go after the foxes, nor would he try any more absurd love affairs with local mongrels. He was always lying down because his stomach was so near the ground when he was standing that it was not worth while for him to keep upright. And lying there stretched out from muzzle to tail at the foot of the tree on which Cosimo was, he would raise a tired look toward his master and scarcely wag his tail. Cosimo was becoming discontented; the sense of the passing of time made him feel a kind of dissatisfaction with his life, spent forever wandering up and down the same old trees. And nothing any longer gave him full contentment, neither hunting, fleeting affairs nor books. He himself did not know what he wanted; taken by one of these moods, he would clamber quickly over the tenderest and most fragile boughs as if searching for other trees growing still higher, so as to climb those too.

One day Ottimo Massimo was restless. There seemed to be a spring wind. The dog raised his muzzle, sniffed and then flung himself down again. Two or three times he got up, moved around and lay down again. Suddenly he began to run. He trotted along slowly, every now and again stopping to take breath. Cosimo followed on the branches.

Ottimo Massimo made toward the woods. He seemed to have a very precise direction in mind, because even when he stopped every now and again to lift a leg, he would stand there with tongue out looking at his master, then scratch himself and begin moving once more with certainty. He was moving into parts little frequented by Cosimo, in fact almost unknown to him, toward the shooting reserves of the Duke Tolemaico. The Duke Tolemaico was a broken-down old rake and certainly had not been out shooting for a very long time, but no poacher could set foot in his reserve as the gamekeepers were numerous and vigilant, and Cosimo, who had had dealings with them, preferred to keep away. Now Ottimo Massimo and Cosimo were plunging deeper and deeper into the Duke's game reserves, but neither one nor the other thought of chasing the precious game; the dog trotted along following some secret call of his own, and the Baron was gripped by an impatient curiosity to discover where on earth the dog was going.

So the dachshund reached a point in which the forest ended and there was an open field. Two stone lions crouched on pillars were holding up a coat-of-arms. Beyond them should have begun a park, a garden, a more private part of the Tolemaico estate; but there was nothing except for those two stone lions with the field beyond, an immense field of short green grass, whose boundaries faded away in the distance against a background of black oak trees. The sky was filmy with clouds. No bird sang.

This field, for Cosimo, was a sight which filled him with discomfort. Having always lived in the thickness of the vegetation at Ombrosa, certain of being able to reach any place by his own routes, the Baron only had to see in front of him an empty and impassable space, bare under the sky, to feel dizzy.

Ottimo Massimo rushed into the field, and began running along at full tilt as if he had become young again. From the ash tree where he was crouching, Cosimo began to whistle at him and call, "Here, come back here, Ottimo Massimo, come back here, where are you going?" but the dog did not obey, did not even turn; he ran on and on through the field until nothing could be seen but a distant dot like a comma—his tail—and even that vanished.

In the ash tree Cosimo was wringing his hands. He was used to the dog's escapes and absences, but now Ottimo Massimo was vanishing into this field where he could not follow, and the flight linked to the anxiety he had felt a short time ago and filled him with a vague sense of expectation, of waiting for something to appear in that field.

He was brooding over these thoughts when he heard steps under his oak tree, and saw a gamekeeper passing, whistling, hands in pockets. The man had a very careless distracted air for one of those terrible gamekeepers of the preserve, and yet the badge on his uniform was that of the ducal retainers, and Cosimo flattened himself against the trunk. Then the thought of the dog overcame his fear; he called down to the gamekeeper: "Hey, you, Sergeant, have you seen a dog around?"

The gamekeeper looked up. "Ah, it's you! The flying hunter with the sliding dog! No, I've not seen the dog. What have you caught this morning?"

Cosimo recognized one of his keenest adversaries, and said: "Oh, nothing, the dog escaped from me and I had to follow him as far as this . . . my gun's unloaded."

The gamekeeper laughed. "Oh, do load it, and fire it, too, whenever you like; it doesn't matter now!"

"Why not now?"

"Now that the Duke is dead, who cares about trespassing here?"

"Oh, he's dead, is he? I didn't know that."

"He's been dead and buried for three months. And there's a row on between the heirs of his first two marriages and his new widow."

"He'd a third wife, had he?"

"He married when he was eighty, a year before he died; she was a girl of twenty-one or so. It was a mad thing to do, a wife who never even spent a day with him, and is only now beginning to visit his estates, which she doesn't like."

"What, she doesn't like them?"

"Oh, well, she installs herself in a palace, or a castle, and arrives with her whole court, as she always has a group of admirers around her, and after three days she finds everything ugly, everything sad, and sets off again. Then the other heirs come forward, rush into that estate and claim rights over it. She says, 'Oh, yes, take it if you like.' Now she's come here to the hunting pavilion, but how long will she stay? Not long, I'd say."

"And where's the hunting pavilion?"

"Down over the field beyond the oak trees."

"Then my dog has gone there. . ."

"He must have gone looking for bones. . . Excuse me, but it makes me think your Lordship doesn't feed him well!"—and he burst out laughing.

Cosimo did not reply, he looked at the uncrossable field, waiting for the dachshund to return.

The whole day long he never came. Next day Cosimo was again on the ash tree looking at the field, as if forced by a turmoil within.

The dog reappeared toward evening, a little dot in the field under Cosimo's sharp eye, becoming more and more visible. "Ottimo Massimo! Come here! Where have you been?" The dog stopped, wagging his tail and looking at his master, and seemed to be inviting him to follow; but then he realized the space Cosimo could not get over, turned back, made a few hesitating paces, and turned again. "Ottimo Massimo! Come here! Ottimo Massimo!" But the dog was running off again and vanished in the distance.

Later two gamekeepers passed. "Still waiting for your dog, your Lordship! But I saw him at the pavilion, in good hands. . ."

"What?"

"But yes, the Marchesa, or rather the widowed Duchess. We call her the Marchesa, as she was the Marchesina as a girl. She's treating him as though he's been with her all the time. He's a lap dog, that one, if you'll allow me to say so, your Lordship. Now he's found a soft billet, he's staying there . . ."

And the two keepers went off grinning. Ottimo Massimo did not return any more. Day after day Cosimo spent on the ash, looking at the field as if he could read something in it that had been struggling inside him for a long time: the very idea of distance, of intangibility, of the waiting that can be prolonged beyond life.





} 21 {


ONE day Cosimo was looking down from the ash tree. The sun was shining, a ray crossed the field, which from pea green went emerald. Down in the blackness of the clump of oaks there was a movement in the undergrowth, and a horse leaped out. On its saddle was a horseman dressed in black, in a cloak—no, a skirt; it wasn't a horseman, it was a horsewoman; she was galloping on a loose rein and she was fair! Cosimo's heart gave a leap, and he found himself longing for the horsewoman to come near enough for him to see her face, and for that face to be very beautiful. But apart from this waiting of his for her to approach and to be beautiful, there was a third thing he was waiting for, a third branch of hope entwining with the other two, a longing that this ever more luminous beauty might respond to a need he felt to recapture some memory once known and now almost forgotten, a memory of which only a wispy line, a faint color now remained, and that this would make all the rest emerge once more, or rather be rediscovered in something present and alive.

There he sat, yearning for her to come nearer his end of the field, by the two towering pillars with the lions; but the wait was becoming agonizing, for now he realized that the horsewoman was not cutting through the field directly toward the lions, but across it diagonally, so that she would soon vanish into the wood again.

He was just about to lose sight of her, when she turned her horse sharply and cut across the field in another diagonal, which would certainly bring her a little nearer, but would make her vanish just the same on the opposite side of the field.

And now, at that moment, Cosimo noticed with annoyance two brown horses ridden by cavaliers, who were coming out of the woods into the field, but he quickly tried to overcome his annoyance, and decided that these horsemen did not matter, one only had to see how they were tacking to and fro after her, he really must not let them bother him, and yet, he had to admit, they annoyed him.

And then the horsewoman, just before vanishing from the field, turned her horse around again, but in the other direction, farther away from Cosimo . . . No, now the horse was circling and galloping this way, and the move seemed done on purpose to baffle the two followers, who were now in fact galloping away and had not yet realized that she was rushing in an opposite direction.

Now everything was going just as he wanted; the horsewoman was galloping along in the sun, getting more and more beautiful and corresponding more and more to Cosimo's lost memories; the only alarming thing was her continual zigzagging, which never gave him any idea of her intentions. The two horsemen did not understand where she was going either, and in trying to follow her gyrations, covered a great deal of ground uselessly, though always with good will and dexterity.

Now, in less time than Cosimo expected, the woman on horseback reached the edge of the field near him, passed between the two pillars surmounted by lions which seemed almost to have been put there in her honor, turned toward the field and everything beyond it with a wide gesture of farewell, galloped on, and passed under the ash tree. Cosimo could now see her face and body, clearly. She was sitting erect in the saddle, a haughty woman's and at the same time a child's face, a forehead happy to be above those eyes, eyes happy to be under that forehead, nose, mouth, chin, collar, everything about her happy to be with every other part of her, it all, yes all, reminded him of the little girl he had seen on the swing the first day he had spent on a tree: Sinforosa Viola Violante of Ondariva.

This discovery, or rather having brought it from unconfessed hope to the point of being able to proclaim it to himself, filled Cosimo as if with a fever. He tried to call so that she would raise her eyes to the ash tree and see him, but from his throat came only a hoarse gurgle and she did not turn.

Now the white horse was galloping into the chestnut grove, and the hoofs were beating on the cones scattered about the ground, splitting them open and exposing the shiny kernels of nut. The woman guided her horse first in one direction, then in another, with Cosimo at one moment thinking her away and unreachable, at another, as he jumped from tree to tree, seeing her with surprise reappear amid the perspective of trunks, and her way of moving fanned more and more the memory flaming up in his mind. He tried to reach her with a call, a sign of his presence, but the only sound that came to his lips was the whistle of a pheasant, and she did not even hear.

The two cavaliers following her seemed to understand her intentions even less than her route and continued to take wrong directions, getting entangled in undergrowth and stuck in bog, while she arrowed her way ahead, safe and uncatchable. Every now and again she would give some order or encouragement to the horsemen by raising her crop or tearing off a carob nut and throwing it, as if to tell them to go that way. The horsemen would at once rush off in that direction, galloping over the fields and slopes, but she had turned another way and was no longer looking at them.

"It's she, it's she!" Cosimo was thinking, more and more inflamed with hope and trying to shout her name, but all that came from his lips was a long sad cry, like a plover's.

Now, this tacking to and fro, this deceiving of the cavaliers, and the games all seemed to be tending one way, however irregular and wavering. Guessing this aim, Cosimo abandoned the impossible task of following her, and said to himself, "I'll go in a place she'll go to, if it's her. In fact, she can't be going anywhere else." And leaping along by his own routes, he moved toward the abandoned park of the Ondarivas.

In that shade, in that scented air, in that place where even the leaves and twigs had another color and another substance, he felt so carried away by memories of his childhood that he almost forgot the horsewoman, or if he did not forget, he at least began telling himself it might not be her and that this waiting and hoping for her seemed so real that it was almost as if she were there.

Then he heard a sound. Horse's hoofs on the gravel. It was coming down the garden no longer at a gallop, as if the rider wanted to look at and recognize everything precisely. There was no sign of the silly cavaliers; they must have lost all trace of her.

He saw her; she was wandering around the fountains, urns and garden pavilions, looking at the plants which had now become huge, with hanging vines, the magnolias grown into a copse. But she did not see him who was trying to call her with the cooing of hoopoes, the trilling of larks, and with sounds that merged into the close twitter of birds in the garden.

She had dismounted, and was leading the horse by the bridle. She reached the villa, left the horse, entered the portico. Then suddenly she broke into shouts of "Ortensia! Gaetano! Tarquinio! This needs whitewashing, the shutters painting, the tapestries hung! And I want the big table here, the side ones there, the spinet in the middle. The pictures must all be rehung."

Cosimo realized then that the house which to his distracted eyes had seemed closed and empty as always, now, in reality, was open and full of people—servants cleaning and polishing and rearranging, opening windows, moving furniture, beating carpets. So it was Viola who was returning, Viola re-establishing herself at Ombrosa, taking possession once again of the villa she had left as a child! And the pulsating joy in Cosimo's heart was not very different from pulsating fear. For her return, the presence of her, unpredictable and proud, under his very eyes, might mean losing her forever, even in his memory, even in that secret place of scented leaves and dappled green light, might mean that he would be forced to flee from her and so flee too from that first memory of her as a girl.

With this alternating heartbeat Cosimo watched her swirling amid the servants, making them move sofas, harpsichords and consoles, then passing hurriedly into the garden and remounting her horse, followed by groups waiting for more orders, then turning to the gardeners, and telling them how to arrange the abandoned flower beds and rescatter on the paths gravel swept away by rain, and put back the wicker chairs, and the swing.

She pointed, with a wave of the arms, at the branch from which this had once been hanging and was now to be hung again, and indicated how long the ropes were to be, and how long its course, and as she was saying all this, her gestures and glance went up to the magnolia tree on which Cosimo had once appeared. And there he was on the magnolia tree, and she saw him again.

She was surprised—very. There was no doubt of that, though her eyes were laughing through her surprise. But she recovered at once and pretended not to care, and smiled with her eyes and mouth, revealing a tooth she had had as a child.

"You!" and then, trying to use as natural a tone as she could, but not succeeding in hiding her interest and pleasure, she went on, "Ah, so you've stayed up there without ever going down?"

Cosimo succeeded in transforming a sparrow's note in his throat into a "Yes, Viola, it's me, d'you remember me?"

"You've never, really never once set a foot on the ground?"

"Never."

Then she, as if she had already conceded too much: "Ah, so you managed it, you see! It couldn't have been so difficult then."

"I was awaiting your return . . ."

"Excellent. Hey, you, where are you taking that curtain! Leave it all here and I'll see to it!" And she began looking at him again. Cosimo that day was dressed for hunting: hairy all over, with his cap of cat's fur and his musket. "You look like Crusoe!"

"Have you read it?" he said at once, to show he was up to date.

Viola had already turned around. "Gaetano! Ampelio! The dry leaves! It's full of dry leaves!" Then to him: "In an hour, at the end of the park. Wait for me." And she hurried away to give more orders, on horseback.

Cosimo threw himself into the thick of the wood; he would have liked it to be a thousand times thicker, a phalanx of branches and leaves and thorns and bracken and maidenhair, to plunge and bury himself in and only after being completely immersed to be able to understand whether he was happy or mad with fear.

On the big tree at the end of the park, with his knees tight against a branch, he looked at the time on an old watch that had belonged to his maternal grandfather, General von Kurtewitz, and said to himself: She won't come. But Donna Viola arrived almost punctually, on horseback. She stopped under the tree without even looking up. She was no longer wearing her rider's hat or jacket, but a white blouse, decorated with lace, and a black skirt that was almost nunlike. Raising herself in her stirrups she held out a hand to him on the branch; he helped her; she climbed onto the saddle and reached the branch, then, still without looking at him, rapidly climbed up it, looked about for a comfortable fork, and sat down. Cosimo crouched at her feet, and could begin only by saying: "So you're back?"

Viola gave him an ironical look. Her hair was as fair as it had been when she was a child. "How do you know that?" said she.

And he, without understanding her little joke: "I saw you in that field of the Duke's preserve."

"The preserve's mine. It can fill with weeds, for all I care! D'you know about it? About me, I mean?"

"No . . . I've only just heard you're a widow now . . ."

"Yes, of course I'm a widow," and she slapped her black skirt, smoothed it out, and began talking very quickly. "You never know anything. There you are on the trees all day long, putting your nose into other people's business, and yet you know nothing. I married old Tolemaico because my family made me, forced me. They said I was a flirt and must have a husband. For a year I've been the Duchess Tolemaico, and it was the most boring year of my life, though I never spent more than a week with the old man. I'll never set foot in any of their castles or ruins or ratholes, may they fill with snakes! From now on I'm staying here, where I was as a child. I'll stay here as long as I feel like it, of course. Then I'll go off. I'm a widow and can do what I like, finally. I've always done what I liked, to tell the truth; even Tolemaico I married because it suited me to many him. It's not true they forced me to; they wanted to get me married off at any cost, and so I chose the most decrepit suitor I could find. 'Then I'll be a widow sooner,' I said, and so I am, now."

Cosimo sat there half stunned by this avalanche of news and peremptory statements, and Viola was further away than ever; flirt, widow, duchess, she was part of an unreachable world, and all he could find to say was: "And whom d'you flirt with now?"

And she: "There. You're jealous. Be careful, as I'll never let you be jealous."

Cosimo did have a flash of jealousy provoked by this quarrel, then thought at once: What? Jealous? Why admit that I could be jealous of her? Why say, "I'll never let you"? It's as good as saying that she thinks that we . . .

Then, scarlet in the face, he felt a longing to tell her, to ask her, to hear her, but it was she who asked him dryly: "Tell me about you now. What have you done?"

"Oh, I've done things," he began saying. "I've hunted, even boar, but mostly foxes, hares, pheasants and then, of course, thrushes and blackbirds; and then pirates—Turkish pirates—we had a great fight; my uncle died in it. And I've read lots of books, for myself and a friend of mine, a brigand who was hanged; and I've got the whole Encyclopaedia of Diderot and have also written to him and he's replied, from Paris; and I've done lots of work, sown crops, saved a wood from fire . . ."

"And will you always love me, absolutely, above all else, and will you do anything for me?"

At this remark of hers, Cosimo, with a catch at the hearty said: "Yes."

"You are a man who has lived on the trees for me alone, to learn to love me . . ."

"Yes . . . yes . . ."

"Kiss me."

He pressed her against the trunk, kissed her. Raising his face, he realized her beauty as if he had never seen it before. "Say, how beautiful you are . . ."

"For you . . ." and she unbuttoned her white blouse. Her breast was young, the nipples rosy. Cosimo just grazed it with his lips, before Viola slid away over the branches as if she were flying, with him clambering after her, and that skirt of hers always in his face.

"But where are you taking me to?" asked Viola as if it were he leading her, not she him.

"This way," exclaimed Cosimo, and began guiding her, and at every passage of branches he would take her by the hand or the waist and show her the way over.

"This way," and they went on to certain olive trees protruding from a cliff, and from the top of these was the sea, of which till now they had glimpsed only a fragment, and even that was half hidden by leaves and branches; but now suddenly they found the sea there facing them, calm and limpid and vast as the sky. The horizon opened wide and high and the blue was stretched and bare, without a sail; and they could count the scarcely perceptible ripples of the waves. Only a very light rustle, like a sigh, ran over the pebbles on the beach.

With eyes half dazed, Cosimo and Viola moved back into the shade of the dark-green foliage. "This way."

In a walnut, at the fork of the trunk, was a hollow, formed from an old ax wound, and this was one of Cosimo's refuges. Over it was stretched a boarskin, and around it were a flask, a tool or two, and a bowl.

Viola flung herself down on the boarskin. "Do you bring other women here?"

He hesitated. And Viola: "If you haven't, you're not much of a man."

"Yes . . . One or two . . ."

She slapped him full in the face. "So that's how you awaited me?"

Cosimo passed his hand over his scarlet cheek and could think of no word to say; but now she seemed to be in a good mood again. "And what were they like? Tell me. What were they like?"

"Not like you, Viola, not like you . . ."

"How d'you know what I'm like, eh, how d'you know?" She was gentle now, and Cosimo never ceased to be surprised at these sudden changes of hers. He moved close to her. Viola was gold and honey.

"Say . . ."

"Say . . ."

They knew each other. He knew her and so himself, for in truth he had never known himself. And she knew him and so herself, for although she had always known herself she had never been able to recognize it until now.





} 22 {


THE first pilgrimage they made was to the tree where, in a deep incision in the bark, now so old and deformed that it no longer seemed the work of human hands, were carved in big letters: Cosimo, Viola, and beneath—Ottimo Massimo.

"Up here? Who did it? When?"

"I; then."

Viola was moved.

"And what does that mean?" and she pointed to the words Ottimo Massimo.

"My dog. That is your dog. The dachshund."

"Turcaret?"

"Ottimo Massimo, I called him."

"Turcaret! How I sobbed for him, when I realized as I left that they hadn't put him in the carriage! . . . Oh, I didn't care about not seeing you again, but was desperate at not having the dog any more!"

"If it hadn't been for the dog I wouldn't have found you again! He sniffed in the wind that you were near, and didn't rest until he found you."

"I recognized him at once, as soon as I saw him arrive at the pavilion, panting fit to burst. . . The others said, 'And where's this come from?' I bent down to look at his color, his markings. 'But he's Turcaret! The dachshund I had as a child at Ombrosa!'"

Cosimo laughed. Suddenly she wrinkled up her nose. "Ottimo Massimo! What an ugly name! Where d'you get such ugly names from?" And Cosimo's face clouded over.

But for Ottimo Massimo now there was no cloud to mar his happiness. His old dog's heart that had been divided between two masters was finally at peace, after having worked day after day to attract the Marchesa toward the borders of the game preserve, to the ilex on which Cosimo was crouching. He had pulled her by the skirt, or skipped away with some object of hers, off toward the field so that she should follow, and she had exclaimed: "But what do you want? Where are you dragging me? Turcaret! Stop it! What a maddening little dog to find again!" But seeing the dachshund had already brought back the memories of childhood, a nostalgia for Ombrosa. And she had at once begun preparing her move from the ducal pavilion and her return to the old villa with its strange vegetation.

She had returned, Viola had. For Cosimo, now began the best period of his life, and for her too, who would go galloping over the country on her white horse and when she caught sight of the Baron between branches and sky would dismount, climb up the slanting trees and branches, on which she soon became almost as expert as he and could reach him anywhere.

"Oh, Viola, I don't know, I don't know where I could still climb . . ."

"To me . . ." Viola would say quietly, and he felt himself almost in a frenzy.

Love for her was a heroic exercise; the pleasure of it was mingled with trials of courage and generosity and dedication and straining of all the faculties of her being. Their world was a world of trees—intricate, gnarled and impervious.

"There!" she would exclaim, pointing to a fork high in the branches, and they would launch out together to reach it and start between them a competition in acrobatics, culminating in new embraces. They made love suspended in the void, propping themselves or holding onto branches, she throwing herself upon him, almost flying.

Viola's determination in love accorded with Cosimo's, but sometimes clashed with his. Cosimo avoided the refinements of dalliance, the wanton perversities; nothing in love pleased him that was not natural. The republican virtues were in the air; a period was coming which would be both licentious and severe. Cosimo, insatiable lover, was a stoic, an ascetic, a puritan. Always in search of happiness in love, he would never be a mere voluptuary. He reached the point of distrusting kisses, caresses, verbal play—everything that clouded or replaced the wholesomeness of nature. It was Viola who revealed that in its fullness. And with her he never knew the sadness after love, preached by theologians; on this subject he even wrote a philosophic letter to Rousseau, who, perhaps disturbed by it, did not reply.

But Viola was also a refined, spoiled, capricious woman, ever yearning in body and soul. Cosimo's love fulfilled her sensually but left her imagination unsatisfied. From that came quarrels and cloudy resentments. But these did not last long, so varied was their life and world around.

When tired they would go back to their refuges in the thickest press of leaves: hammocks which enwrapped their bodies like furled leaves, or hanging pavilions with curtains flapping in the breeze, or beds of feathers. At such contrivances Donna Viola was very talented. Wherever she happened to be, the Marchesa had the gift of creating around her ease, luxury and elaborate comfort—elaborate in appearance, but accomplished by her with miraculous facility, for everything she wanted had to be carried out at once and at all costs.

On these aerial alcoves of theirs the robins would perch to sing, and between the curtains would flutter butterflies, in pairs, chasing each other. On summer afternoons, when sleep took the two lovers side by side, a squirrel would enter, looking for something to nibble, and stroke their faces with its feathery tail or plunge its teeth into a big toe. Then they would pull the curtains to more carefully; but a family of tree mice began gnawing at the roof of the pavilion and fell down on their heads.

This was the time in which they were discovering each other, telling of their lives, questioning.

"And did you feel alone?"

"I hadn't you."

"But alone before the rest of the world?"

"No. Why? I always had contacts with other people; I picked fruit, pruned trees, studied philosophy with the Abbé, fought the pirates. Isn't it like that for everyone?"

"You're the only one like that, that's why I love you."

But the Baron had not yet realized what Viola would accept from him and what not. Sometimes a mere nothing, a word or a tone of his was enough to loose the fury of the Marchesa.

He might say for example: "With Gian dei Brughi I used to read novels, with the Cavalier I made plans for irrigation. . ."

"And with me?"

"With you I make love. Like picking fruit or pruning . . ."

She would be silent, motionless. At once Cosimo would realize he had unchained her anger; suddenly her eyes would become cold as ice.

"Why, what is it, Viola, what have I said?"

She was far away as if she did not see or hear, a hundred miles from him, her face like marble.

"But no, Viola, what is it, why, listen . . ."

Viola got up; agile, with no need of help, she began climbing down the tree. Cosimo had not yet understood what his mistake could have been, had not had time to think it over, perhaps preferred not to think of it at all, not to understand it, the better to proclaim his innocence. "No, no, you didn't understand, Viola, listen . . ."

He followed her on to a branch lower down. "Viola, don't go, please don't go, not like this, Viola . . ."

She spoke now, but to the horse, which she had reached and taken by the bridle. She mounted and off she went.

Cosimo began to despair, to jump from tree to tree. "No, Viola, do stay, Viola!"

She had galloped away. He followed her over the branches. "Please, Viola, I love you!" But he had lost sight of her. He flung himself on uncertain branches, made risky leaps. "Viola! Viola!"

When he was sure of having lost her and could not restrain his sobs, suddenly she reappeared at the trot, without raising her eyes.

"Look, do look, Viola. Look what I'm doing!" and he began banging himself against a trunk with his bare head (which was, in truth, very hard).

She did not even look at him. She was already away.

Cosimo waited for her to return, zigzagging among the trees.

"Viola! I'm desperate!" and he flung himself into empty space, head down, gripping a branch with his legs and hitting himself with his fists all over his head and face. Or he began to break branches in a fury of destruction, and a leafy elm was reduced in a few seconds to a bare stripped bark as if a hailstorm had passed.

But he never threatened to kill himself; indeed he never threatened anything. Emotional blackmail was not for him. He did what he felt like doing and announced it while he was actually doing it, not before.

Then suddenly Donna Viola, unpredictable as her anger, reappeared. Of all Cosimo's follies which seemed never to have reached her, one had suddenly set her aflame with pity and love. "No, Cosimo, darling, wait for me!" And she jumped from her saddle and rushed to clamber up a trunk, and his arms were ready to raise her on high.

Love took over again with a fury equal to the quarrel. It was, really, the same thing, but Cosimo had not realized it. "Why d'you make me suffer?"

"Because I love you."

Now it was his turn to get angry. "No, no, you don't love me! People in love want happiness, not pain!"

"People in love want only love, even at the cost of pain."

"Then you're making me suffer on purpose."

"Yes, to see if you love me."

The Baron's philosophy would not go any further. "Pain is a negative state of the soul."

"Love is all."

"Pain should always be fought against."

"Love refuses nothing."

"Some things I'll never admit."

"Oh yes, you do, now, for you love me and you suffer."

Like his outbursts of despair, Cosimo's explosions of uncontainable joy were noisy. Sometimes his happiness reached such a point that he had to leave his love and go jumping off and shouting and proclaiming her wonders to the world.

"Yo quiero the most wonderful puellam de todo el mundo!"

Those sitting on the benches at Ombrosa, idlers or old salts, got quite into the habit of these sudden appearances of his. There he would come leaping through the ash trees declaiming:

"Zu dir, zu dir, gunaika,

Vo cercando il mio ben

En la isla de Jamaica

Du soir jusqu'au matin!"

or:

Il y a un pré where the grass grows toda de oro Take me away, take me away, che io ci moro!

then he would vanish.

His studies of classic and modern languages, however little pursued, were enough to let himself go in this clamorous expression of his feelings, and the more he was shaken to the roots by intense emotion, the more his language became obscure. They remember here how once, at the Feast of the Patron Saint, when the people of Ombrosa were gathered in the square around the Tree of Plenty and the festoons and the flagpole, the Baron appeared on the top of a plane tree and with one of those leaps of his, which only his acrobatic agility could produce, jumped onto the Tree of Plenty, clambered to the top, shouted: "Que viva die schöne Venus posteriór!" let himself slither down the pole almost to the ground, stopped, groped his way up to the top again, tore from the trophy a round rosy cheese, and with another of his jumps returned to the plane tree and fled, leaving the people of Ombrosa bewildered.

Nothing made the Marchesa happier than these exuberances, and they moved her to repay him with demonstrations of love that were even more violent. The Ombrosians, when they saw her galloping along on a loose rein, her face almost buried in the white mane of the horse, knew that she was rushing to a meeting with the Baron. Even in her way of riding she expressed a love force, but here Cosimo could no longer follow her; and her equestrian passion, much as he admired it, was for him a secret reason for jealousy and rancor, for he saw Viola dominated by a world vaster than his own and realized that he would never be able to have her for himself alone, to shut her in the confines of his kingdom. The Marchesa, on her side, suffered perhaps from her inability to be at once both lover and horsewoman; every now and again she was taken with a vague need for her love and Cosimo's to become a love on horseback, a feeling that running over trees was no longer enough for her, a yearning to race along at full gallop on the crupper of her charger.

And in fact her horse, with that racing over countryside all slopes and drops, was getting to be fleet as a roebuck, and Viola now began urging it up certain trees—old olives, for example, with bent trunks. Sometimes the horse would reach the first fork in the branches, and she got into the habit of tying it up no longer on the ground, but up in the olive. Dismounting, she would leave it to munch leaves and twigs.

And so when some old gossip passing through the olive grove and raising curious eyes saw the Baron and the Marchesa up there in each other's arms, and went off and told people, and added: "The white horse was up on a branch too," he was taken for a lunatic and no one believed him. And once again that time the lovers' secret was saved.





} 23 {


THIS last story shows that the people of Ombrosa, who before had been teeming with gossip about my brother's love life, now, faced with this passion exploding as it were above their heads, maintained a dignified reserve, as if toward something bigger than themselves. Not that they did not criticize the Marchesa's conduct; but more for its exterior aspects, such as that breakneck galloping of hers ("Where can she be going, at such a pace?") and that continual hoisting of furniture on to treetops. There was already an air among them of considering it all just as one of the nobles' ways, one of their many idiosyncrasies. ("All up trees, nowadays; women, men. What'll they think of next?") In fact, times were coming that were to be more tolerant, but also more hypocritical.

Now the Baron would only show himself at rare intervals on the ilexes in the square; and when he did, it was a sign that she had left. For Viola was sometimes away months seeing to her properties scattered all over Europe, though these departures of hers always corresponded to rifts in their relationship when the Marchesa had been offended with Cosimo's not understanding what she wanted him to understand about love. Not that Viola left in this state of mind: they always managed to make it up before, though there remained the suspicion in him that she had decided to take this particular journey because she was tired of him, and he could not prevent her going; perhaps she was already breaking away from him, perhaps some incident on the journey or a pause for reflection would decide her not to return. So my brother would live in a state of anxiety. He would try to go back to the life he had been used to before meeting her, to hunt and fish, follow the work in the fields, his studies, the gossip in the square, as if he had never done anything else (there persisted in him the stubborn youthful pride of refusing ever to admit himself under anyone else's influence); and at the same time he would congratulate himself on how much love was giving him, the alacrity, the pride; but on the other hand, he noticed that so many things no longer mattered to him, that without Viola life had no flavor, that his thoughts were always following her. The more he tried, away from the whirlwind of Viola's presence, to reacquire command of passions and pleasures in a wise economy of mind, the more he felt the void left by her or the fever for her return. In fact his love was just what Viola wanted it to be, not as he pretended it was; it was always the woman who triumphed, even from a distance, and Cosimo, in spite of himself, ended by enjoying it.

Then all at once the Marchesa would return. The season of love in the trees would resume, but so too would the season of jealousy. Where had Viola been? What had she done? Cosimo longed to know, but at the same time he was afraid of how she might answer his questions. She would reply with hints, and each hint would further arouse his suspicions, and he realized that though she was purposely answering in such a way as to torment him, it could all be quite true nevertheless. In these uncertainties, he would hide his jealousy one minute, and then the next there would be a violent outburst. Viola would never reply the same way—her answers were always different, always unpredictable. One moment Cosimo would think she was more attached to him than ever, and the next he felt he would never be able to arouse her again.

What the Marchesa really did during her travels we at Ombrosa could not know, far as we were from capitals and their gossip. But I happened at that period to make my second journey to Paris in connection with certain contracts in lemons, for many nobles were already taking to commerce, and I was among the first.

One evening, at one of the most brilliant salons in Paris, I met Donna Viola. Her headdress was so splendid and her gown so sumptuous that if I recognized her at once, in fact gave a start at first seeing her, it was because she was a woman who could never be confused with any other. She greeted me with indifference, but soon found a way of taking me aside and asking me, without waiting for any reply between one question and another: "Have you news of your brother? Will you soon be back at Ombrosa? Here, give him this to remember me by," and taking a silk handkerchief from her bosom she thrust it into my hand. Then she quickly let herself be caught up in the court of admirers who followed her everywhere.

"Do you know the Marchesa?" I was asked quietly by a Parisian friend.

"Only slightly," I replied, and it was true; when she stayed at Ombrosa Donna Viola, under the influence of Cosimo's life in the wilds, never bothered to see anything of the local nobility.

"Rarely has such beauty been allied to such a restless spirit," said my friend. "Gossip has it that in Paris she passes from one lover to another, in such rapid succession that no one can call her his own and consider himself privileged. But every now and again she vanishes for months at a time and they say she retires to a convent, to wallow in penance."

I could scarcely avoid laughing at finding the Marchesa's life on the trees of Ombrosa being thought of by the Parisians as periods of penance; but at the same time this gossip disturbed me, and made me foresee times of sorrow for my brother.

To forestall ugly surprises I decided to warn him, and as soon as I returned to Ombrosa went to search him out. He questioned me at length about my journey and the news from France, but I could not tell him anything of politics and literature about which he was not already informed.

Eventually I drew Donna Viola's handkerchief from my pocket. "At Paris in a salon I met a lady who knows you, and who gave me this for you, with her greetings."

Quickly he dropped the basket attached to the rope, pulled up the silk handkerchief and brought it to his face as if to inhale its scent. "Ah, you saw her? And how was she? Tell me, how was she?"

"Very beautiful and very brilliant," I answered slowly. "But they say this scent is inhaled by many nostrils."

He held the handkerchief against his chest as if fearing it might be torn away from him; then turned to me red in the face. "And have you no sword to thrust those lies down the throat of the person who told you?"

I had to confess that it had not even crossed my mind.

He was silent a moment. Then he shrugged his shoulders. "All lies. I alone know she's mine alone," and he ran off on the branches without a word of farewell. I recognized his usual way of refusing to admit anything which would force him out of his own world.

From then on every time I saw him he was sad and impatient, jumping about here and there, without doing anything. If now and again I heard him whistling in competition with the blackbirds, his note was ever more restless and gloomy.

The Marchesa arrived. As always, his jealousy pleased her; she incited it a little, turned it a little into a joke. So back came the beautiful days of love, and my brother was happy.

But now the Marchesa never let pass a chance to accuse Cosimo of having a narrow idea of love.

"What d'you mean? That I'm jealous?"

"You're right to be jealous. But you try to make jealousy submit to reason."

"Of course; so I can do more about it."

"You reason too much. Why should one ever reason about love?"

"To love you all the more. Everything done with reasoning grows in power."

"You live on trees and have the mentality of a notary with gout."

"The most arduous deeds must be undertaken in the simplest states of mind."

He went on mouthing maxims, till she fled; then he ran after her, desperate, tearing his hair.

In those days a British flagship anchored in our port. The Admiral gave a party for the notables of Ombrosa and the officers of other ships that happened to be in port; the Marchesa went; and from that evening Cosimo felt the pangs of jealousy start anew. Two officers of two different ships fell in love with Donna Viola and were seen continually on shore, courting the lady and trying to outdo each other in attentions. One was a flag officer on the British flagship; the other was also a flag officer, but of the Neapolitan fleet. Hiring two sorrels, the two officers would alternate beneath the Marchesa's balconies, and when they met, the Neapolitan would roll at the Englishman an eye so fiery that it should have burned him on the spot, while between the half-shut lids of the Englishman glinted a glance like the point of a sword.

And Donna Viola? What should she do, the minx, but remain hour by hour at home, leaning over the window sill in her peignoir, as if she were newly widowed and just out of mourning! Cosimo, not having her on the trees with him any more, not hearing her white horse galloping toward him, was going crazy, and ended by settling (even he) before that window sill, to keep an eye on her and the two flag officers.

He was plotting a way to prepare some dreadful pitfall for his rivals so they would return immediately to their respective ships, when he noticed that Viola showed signs of encouraging both of them. He began hoping that she was only teasing them, and him too. He continued keeping a close watch on her nevertheless, and was ready to intervene the minute she showed any sign of preferring one to the other.

Along, one morning, comes the Englishman. Viola is at the window. They smile at each other. The Marchesa lets fall a note. The officer catches it in the air, reads it, bows, blushes, and spurs away. A rendezvous! The Englishman was the lucky one! Cosimo swore he wouldn't let him get through that night undisturbed.

At that moment along comes the Neapolitan. Viola throws him a note too. The officer reads it, puts it to his lips and kisses it. So he thought he was the chosen one, did he? What about the other, then? Against which was Cosimo to act? Donna Viola must surely have fixed an appointment with one of them; on the other she must have just played one of her tricks. Or did she want to make fun of them both?

As for the place of the meeting, Cosimo settled his suspicions on a pavilion at the end of the park. This had been done up and furnished by the Marchesa a short time before, and Cosimo was gnawed with jealousy at the thought of the times when she had loaded the treetops with sofas and curtains; now she was concentrating on places he could never enter. "I'll watch the pavilion," said Cosimo to himself. "If she's arranged a meeting with one of the two officers, it can only be there." And he hid in the foliage of a horse chestnut.

Shortly before dusk, the sound of a galloping horse is heard. It is the Neapolitan. Now I'll provoke him! thinks Cosimo, takes his catapult and hits him on the neck with a handful of squirrel's dung. The officer shakes himself, looks around. Cosimo comes out on his branch, and as he appears in the open, sees the English officer dismounting beyond a hedge and tying his horse to a stake. "Then it's him; perhaps the other was just passing here by chance." And down comes a load of dung on the Englishman's nose.

"Who's there?" says the Englishman, and makes to cross the hedge, but finds himself face to face with his Neapolitan colleague, who has also dismounted and is also saying, "Who's there?"

"I beg your pardon, sir," says the Englishman, "but I must ask you to leave here at once!"

"I'm here with full right," exclaims the Neapolitan. "It's I who must ask your Lordship to leave!"

"No right can be more than mine," replies the Englishman. "I'm sorry, but I cannot allow you to stay."

"'Tis a question of honor," says the other, "and I rely upon that of my House: Salvatore di San Cataldo di Santa Maria Capua Vetere, of the Navy of His Majesty of the Two Sicilies!"

"Sir Osbert Castlefight, third of the name!" the Englishman introduced himself. "'Tis on my honor that I demand that you vacate the field."

"Not before I have put you out with this trusty sword!" and he draws it from its sheath.

"Sir, you wish to fight!" exclaims Sir Osbert, and puts himself on guard.

They fight.

"This is where I wanted you, colleague, and for many a day," and the Neapolitan makes a thrust.

And Sir Osbert, parrying: "I've been following your movements for some time, sir, and was awaiting this!"

Equals in skill, the two officers threw themselves into assaults and feints. They were at the height of their fury when: "Stop in heaven's name!" exclaimed a voice. On the steps of the pavilion had appeared Donna Viola.

"Marchesa, this man . . ." said the two officers in one voice, lowering their swords and pointing to each other.

And Donna Viola: "My dear friends! Sheath your blades, I beg you! Is this the way to alarm a lady? I had chosen this pavilion as the most silent and most secret place in my park, and scarcely have I dozed off than I hear the clash of arms!"

"But, Milady," said the Englishman, "was I not invited by you?"

"You were here awaiting me, Signora. . ." said the Neapolitan.

From Donna Viola's throat came a laugh light as a flutter of wings. "Ah, yes, yes, I had invited you . . . or you. Oh, I get so confused. Well, sirs, what are you waiting for? Do come in, please. . ."

"Milady, I thought the invitation was for me alone. I am disappointed. May I offer my respects and request leave to withdraw."

"I too wish to say the same, Signora, and bid farewell."

The Marchesa laughed. "My good friends. . . My good friends . . . I'm so scatterbrained . . . I thought I had invited Sir Osbert at one time . . . and Don Salvatore at another . . . No, no, excuse me; at the same time, but in different places . . . Oh, no, how can that be? . . . Well, anyway, seeing that you are both here, why can we not sit down and hold civilized converse?" The two lieutenants looked at each other, then looked at her. "Are we to understand, Marchesa, that you are pretending to accept our attentions merely in order to make fun of both of us?"

"Why so, my good friends? On the contrary, quite on the contrary. . . Your assiduity can scarcely leave me indifferent. . . You are both such dear people . . . And that is my worry . . . If I choose the elegance of Sir Osbert I shall lose you, my passionate Don Salvatore. . . And by choosing the fire of the officer of San Cataldo, I would have to renounce you, sir. Oh, why ever . . . why ever . . ."

"Why ever what?" asked the two officers in one voice.

And Donna Viola, lowering her eyes: "Why ever could it not be both at the same time?"

From the horse chestnut above came a crash of branches. It was Cosimo, who could retain his calm no longer.

But the two flag officers were too confused to hear this. They both stepped back a pace. "That never, Madame."

The Marchesa raised her lovely face with its most radiant smile. "Well, then, I shall give myself to the first of you who, to please me in all things, declares himself ready to share me with his rival!"

"Signora."

"Milady."

The two officers bowed coldly to Viola, then turned to face each other, held out their hands and shook.

"I was sure you were a gentleman, Signor Cataldo," said the Englishman.

"I never doubted your honor, Sir Osberto," exclaimed the Neapolitan.

They turned their backs on the Marchesa and marched off toward their horses.

"My friends . . . Why so offended . . . Silly boys . . ." Viola was saying, but the two officers already had their feet in the stirrups.

It was the moment for which Cosimo had long been waiting, enjoying in anticipation the revenge he had prepared, when the two would get a most painful surprise. Now, however, seeing their virile attitude in bidding farewell to the immodest Marchesa, Cosimo suddenly felt reconciled with them. Too late! Now it was too late to remove his appalling devices for revenge! A second's thought, and Cosimo had generously decided to warn them. "Stop!" he called from the tree. "Don't mount!"

The two officers raised startled heads. "What are you doing up there? What d'you mean by this? Come down!"

Behind them was heard Donna Viola's laugh, one of her bird's wing laughs.

The two were looking perplexed. So there was a third, who seemed to have been present at the whole scene! The situation was becoming more complicated than ever.

"Anyway," said they to each other, "we two remain in complete agreement!"

"On our honor!"

"Neither of us two will agree to share Milady with anyone else!"

"Never on our lives!"

"But if one of us two should decide to accept. . ."

"In that case, still agreed! We would accept together!"

"That's a pact! And now, away!"

At this new dialogue, Cosimo began gnawing his thumb with rage for having tried to prevent his own revenge. "Let it be, then!" he said to himself, and drew back into the leaves. The two officers leaped into their saddles. Now they'll yell, thought Cosimo, and stopped his ears. Double shrieks rang out. The two flag officers had sat on two porcupines hidden under the trappings of their saddles.

"Betrayed!" They flew to the ground in an explosion of screams and hops and writhing and they looked as if they were going to put the blame on the Marchesa.

But Donna Viola, more indignant than they, shouted up: "You malicious, monstrous monkey!" She rushed toward the trunk of the horse chestnut and rapidly vanished from the sight of the two officers, who thought she had been swallowed up by the earth.

Up in the branches Viola was facing Cosimo. They looked at each other with flaming eyes, and their rage gave them a kind of purity, like archangels. They seemed just about to tear each other to pieces, when, "Oh, my darling!" exclaimed the woman. "That's, yes, that's how I like you. Jealous, implacable! . . ." Already she had flung an arm around his neck and they were embracing and now Cosimo could remember nothing more.

She was in his arms, then took her face from his, as if some thought had struck her, and said: "But that pair, too, how much they love me. Did you see? They're even ready to share me between them . . ."

Cosimo felt for a second like flinging himself at her, then he pulled himself up on the branches, tore the leaves with his teeth, and banged his head against the trunk. "They're vermin . . ."

Viola had moved away, her face immobile like a statue's. "You've a lot to learn from them!" She turned and climbed quickly down the tree.

The two suitors had quite forgotten their past differences, and were now absorbed in patiently helping to pick out each other's quills. They were interrupted by Donna Viola. "Quick! Into my carriage!" They all vanished behind the pavilion. The carriage moved off. Cosimo was left on the horse chestnut, hiding his face in his hands.

Now began a time of torment for Cosimo, and also for the two ex-rivals. And for Viola, could it be called a time of joy? I believe the Marchesa tormented others because she wanted to torment herself. The two noble officers were always underfoot; inseparable, under her windows, or in her salon, or on long bouts in the local tavern. She would flatter them both and ask them to compete in constant new proofs of love, which every time they declared themselves ready to do; and by now they were even ready to halve her with each other, not only that, but to share her with anyone else, and once they had begun rolling down the slippery slopes of concessions, they could no longer halt, each urged by the wish to succeed thus in moving her and obtaining the fulfillment of her promises, and each at the same time tied in a pact of solidarity with his rival, and devoured too by jealousy and by the hope of supplanting him, and, I fear, by the pull of die obscure degradation into which they felt themselves sinking.

At every new concession torn from the naval officers, Viola would mount her horse and go to tell Cosimo about it.

"Say, d'you know the Englishman is ready to do this and this . . . And the Neapolitan too . . ." She would shout as soon as she saw him gloomily perching on a tree.

Cosimo would not reply.

"This is absolute love," she would insist.

"Absolute shit, that's what you all are!" screamed Cosimo, and vanished.

This was now their cruel way of loving each other, and from it they could find no way out.

The English flagship was about to weigh anchor. "You're staying, aren't you?" said Viola to Sir Osbert. Sir Osbert did not report on board and was declared a deserter. In a spirit of solidarity and emulation, Don Salvatore did the same.

"They've deserted!" announced Viola triumphantly to Cosimo. "For me! And you . . ."

"And I?" screamed Cosimo with such a ferocious look that Viola did not dare say another word.

Sir Osbert and Salvatore di San Cataldo, deserters from the navies of their respective Majesties, now spent their days at the tavern, playing dice, pale, restless, trying to encourage each other, while Viola was at the peak of her discontent with herself and with all around her.

She took her horse, went toward the wood. Cosimo was on an oak. She stopped underneath, in a field.

"I'm tired."

"Of those?"

"Of you all."

"Ah!"

"They've given me the greatest proofs of love. . ."

Cosimo spat.

". . . But that's not enough for me."

Cosimo lowered his eyes to meet hers.

And she: "Don't you think that love should be an absolute dedication, a renunciation of self?"

There she was in the field, lovely as ever, and the coldness just touching her features and the haughtiness of her bearing would have dissolved at a touch, and he would have had her in his arms again . . . Anything would have been all right for Cosimo to say, anything to show he was ready to give in: "Tell me what you want me to do, I'm ready"—and once more there would have been happiness for him, happiness without a cloud. But he said: "There can be no love if one does not remain oneself with all one's strength."

Viola shrugged in irritation, which was also a shrug of weariness. And yet she could have understood him still, as in fact she did understand him then and had on the tip of her tongue the words, "You are as I want you," and she would be back with him again . . . She bit her lip. And said: "Be yourself by yourself, then."

"But being myself then has no sense." That is what Cosimo wanted to say. Instead of which he said: "If you prefer those vermin . . ."

"I will not allow you to despise my friends!" she shouted, still thinking: All that matters to me is you, and it is only for you that I do all I do!

"So, I'm the only one to be despised."

"What a way you think!"

"It's part of me."

"Then good-by. I leave tonight. You won't see me again."

She hurried to the house, packed her bags, and left without even a word to the officers. And she kept her word, never returned to Ombrosa. She went to France, and there a succession of historical events stood in her way when she was longing for nothing but to return. The Revolution broke out, then the war; first the Marchesa took an interest in the new course of events (she was in the entourage of Lafayette), then emigrated to Belgium and from there to England. In the London mists, during the long years of wars against Napoleon, she would dream of the trees of Ombrosa. Then she remarried—an English peer connected with the East India Company—and settled at Calcutta. From her terrace she would look out over the forests, the trees even stranger than those of the gardens of her childhood; every moment it seemed that she could see Cosimo appearing through the leaves. But it would be the shadow of a monkey, or a jaguar.

Sir Osbert Castlefight and Salvatore di San Cataldo remained linked in life and death, and launched into a career of adventure. They were seen in the gambling houses of Venice, in the Faculty of Theology at Göttingen, in Petersburg at the Court of Catherine II. Then trace was lost.

Cosimo remained for a long time wandering aimlessly around the woods, weeping, ragged, refusing food. He would sob out loud, as do newborn babes. The birds which had once fled at the approach of this infallible marksman would now come near him, on the tops of nearby trees or flying over his head, and the sparrow called, the goldfinch trilled, the turtle dove cooed, the thrush whistled, the chaffinch chirped and so did the wren; and from their lairs on high issued the squirrels, the tree mice, the field mice, to add their squeals to the chorus, so that my brother moved amidst this cloud of lamentation.

Then a destructive violence came over him; every tree, beginning from the top, leaf by leaf, he quickly stripped till it was bare as in winter, even if it usually shed no leaves at all. Then climbing back to the peaks he would break off all the smaller branches and twigs till he left nothing but the main wood, would go farther up and with a penknife begin to strip off the bark, and the stricken trees could be seen showing the whites of ghastly wounds.

In all this frenzy of his there was no resentment against Viola, only remorse at having lost her, at not having known how to keep her tied to him, at having wounded her with a pride unjust and stupid. For, he understood now, she had always been faithful to him, and if she took a pair of other men about with her it merely meant that it was Cosimo alone she considered worthy of being her only lover, and all her whims and dissatisfactions were but an insatiable urge for the increase of their love and the refusal to admit it could reach a limit, and it was he, he, he, who had understood nothing of this and had goaded her till he lost her.

For some weeks he kept to the woods, alone as never before; he had not even Ottimo Massimo, for Viola had taken the dog with her. When my brother showed himself at Ombrosa again, he had changed. Not even I could delude myself any longer; this time Cosimo really had gone mad.





} 24 {


IT HAD always been said at Ombrosa that Cosimo was mad, ever since he had jumped onto the trees at the age of twelve and refused to come down. But later, as happens, this madness of his had been accepted by all, and I am not talking only of his determination to live up there, but of the various oddities of his character; and no one considered him other than an original. Then in the full spate of his love for Viola there were those burblings in incomprehensible languages, particularly the ones during the Feast of the Patron Saint, which some considered as sacrilege, interpreting his words as heretical cries, perhaps in Punic, the tongue of the Pelasgians, or as a profession of Socinianism, in Polish. Since then began the rumor—"The Baron's gone mad"—and the conventional added, "How can someone go mad who's always been mad?"

In the midst of these different pronouncements, Cosimo really had gone mad. If before he went about dressed in furs from head to foot, now he began to adorn his head with feathers, like the American aborigines, bright-colored feathers of hoopoes or greenfinch, and apart from those on his head he scattered feathers all over his clothes. He ended by making himself jackets all covered with feathers, and imitating the habits of the various birds, such as the woodpecker, drawing worms and insects from the tree trunks and boasting of what riches he had found.

He would also make speeches in defense of birds, to the people who gathered to listen and banter under the trees; and from marksman he became barrister to the feathered tribe, and declared himself now a tomtit, now an owl, now a redbreast, and would wear suitable camouflaging and make long prosecution speeches against human beings, who did not know how to recognize birds as their real friends, speeches which were accusations in the form of parables against all human society. The birds also realized this change in his ideas, and came close to him, even if there were people listening beneath. Thus he was able to illustrate his speeches with living examples, which he pointed out on the branches around.

Because of this particular quality of his, there was much talk among the hunters of Ombrosa of using him as a decoy, but no one ever dared fire on the birds perching near him. For even now when he was more or less out of his senses the Baron still impressed them: they quizzed him, yes, and often under his trees he had a retinue of urchins and idlers jesting at his expense; yet he was also respected, and always heard with attention.

His trees were now hung all over with scrawled pieces of paper and bits of cardboard with maxims from Seneca and Shaftesbury, and with various objects: clusters of feathers, church candles, crowns of leaves, women's corsets, pistols, scales, tied to each other in a certain order. The Ombrosians used to spend hours trying to guess what those symbols meant: nobles, Pope, virtue, war? I think some of them had no meaning at all but just served to jog his memory and make him realize that even the most uncommon ideas could be right.

Cosimo also began to write certain things himself, such as The Song of the Blackbird, The Knock of the Woodpecker, The Dialogue of the Owls, and to distribute them publicly. In fact, it was at this very period of dementia that he learned the art of printing and began to print some pamphlets or gazettes (among them The Magpie's Gazette), later all collected under the title, The Bipeds' Monitor. He had brought into a nut tree a typographer's table and chase, a press, a case of type, and a crock of ink, and he spent his days composing his pages and pulling his copies. Sometimes spiders and butterflies would get caught between type and paper, and their marks would be printed on the page; sometimes a lizard would jump on the sheet while the ink was fresh and smear everything with its tail; sometimes the squirrels would take a letter of the alphabet and carry it off to their lair thinking it was something to eat, as happened with the letter Q, which because of its round shape and stalk they mistook for a fruit, so that Cosimo had to begin some of his articles with Cueer and end them with C.E.D.

All this was very fine, of course, but I had the impression that at the time my brother had not only gone mad, but was getting imbecilic too, which was more serious and sadder, for madness is a force of nature, for good or evil, while imbecility is a weakness of nature, without any counterpart.

In winter, though, he seemed able to reduce himself to a kind of lethargy. He would hang on a bough in his lined sleeping bag, with only his head out, as if from a huge nest, and it was rare if, in the warmest hours of the day, he made more than a few hops to reach the alder tree over the Merdanzo torrent, for his daily duties. He would stay in the bag desultorily reading (lighting a little oil lamp in the dark), or muttering to himself, or humming. But most of the time he spent sleeping.

For eating he had certain mysterious arrangements of his own, but he would accept offerings of minestrone or ravioli when some kind soul brought these up to him on a ladder. In fact, a kind of superstition had grown up among the local peasants that an offering to the Baron brought luck—a sign that he aroused either fear or good will, and I think it was the latter. That the reigning Baron of Rondò should live on public charity seemed improper to me; and above all I thought of what our dead father would have said if he had known. As for myself, till then I had nothing to reproach myself with, for my brother had always despised family comforts and had signed that power of attorney by which, after giving him a small allowance (which he spent almost entirely on books) I had no more duties toward him. But now, seeing him incapable of getting himself food, I tried making one of our lackeys in livery and white wig go up a ladder to him with a quarter of turkey and a glass of Bordeaux on a salver. I thought he would refuse from one of those mysterious principles of his, instead of which he accepted at once and most willingly; and from then on, every time it crossed my mind, we would send a portion of our viands up to him on the branches.

Yes, it was a sad decline. Then luckily there was an invasion of wolves, and that gave Cosimo a chance to show his best qualities again. It was an icy winter, snow had even fallen in our woods. Packs of wolves, pushed out of the Alps by famine, fell on to our coasts. Some woodman ran into them and rushed back in terror with the news. The people of Ombrosa, who from the days of the guardians against fires had learned to unite in moments of danger, began to take turns as sentries around the town, to prevent the famished beasts from getting nearer. But no one dared go beyond the houses, particularly at night.

"What bad luck the Baron isn't what he used to be!" they were saying at Ombrosa.

That hard winter had not been without effect on Cosimo's health. He was dangling there crouched in his pelt like a chrysalis in its cocoon, his nose dribbling, looking muzzy and vague. The alarm went up about the wolves and people passing beneath called up: "Ah, Baron, once it would have been you keeping guard from your trees, and now it's we who are guarding you."

He remained with his eyes half closed, as if he did not understand or did not care about anything. Then, suddenly he raised his head, blew his nose and said, hoarsely: "Sheep. For the wolves. Put some on the trees. Tied."

People were crowding about beneath to hear what nonsense he would bring out and to jeer. Instead he rose from the sack, puffing and coughing, and said: "I'll show you where," and moved off among the branches.

Onto some walnuts or oaks, between woods and cultivated land, in positions chosen with great care, Cosimo told them to bring sheep or lambs, which he himself tied to branches, alive, bleating, but in such a way that they could not fall down. On each of these trees he hid a musketful of grapeshot. He then dressed himself up like a sheep: hood, jacket, breeches—all of curly sheepskin. And he began to wait out the night on the open trees. Everyone thought this was the maddest thing he had ever done.

That very night, though, down came the wolves. Sniffing the scent of sheep, hearing the bleating and then seeing them up there, the whole pack stopped at the foot of the trees and howled with famished fangs bared and clawed against the trunk. And now, bounding over the branches, along came Cosimo, and the wolves, seeing that cross between sheep and man hopping up there like a bird, were transfixed. Until "Bum! Bum!" and they got a couple of bullets in the throat. A couple—for Cosimo carried one gun with him (and recharged every time) and had another on every tree ready with a bullet in the barrel; so every time he fired, two wolves were stretched on the frozen ground. He exterminated a great number like that and at every shot the pack tacked to and fro in confused flight, while the other men with guns ran to where they heard the cries, and their shots did the rest.

Cosimo had many a tale in many a version to tell afterward about this wolf hunt, and I could not say which was the right one. For example: "The battle was going quite well when, as I was moving toward the tree with the last sheep on it, I found three wolves which had managed to climb up on to the branches and were just killing it off. Half blinded and stunned by fever as I was, I nearly got up to the wolves' snouts before they noticed me. Then, seeing this other sheep walking on two feet along the branches, they turned on it, baring fangs still red with blood. My gun was unloaded, as after all that firing I had run out of powder, and I could not reach the gun on that tree as the wolves were there. I was on a smaller, rather weak branch, but above me was a stronger one within arm's reach. I began walking backward on my branch, retreating slowly away from the main trunk. And slowly, following me, came a wolf. But I was hanging on to the branch above by my hands, and moving my feet on that other one; really I was hanging from above. The wolf, deceived, moved forward and the branch bent beneath it while with a jump I yanked myself on to the branch above. Down the wolf went with a little bark like a dog's, broke its back on the ground and killed itself."

"And what about the other two wolves?"

". . . The other two were stock-still, staring at me. Then suddenly I took off my sheepskin jacket and hood and threw them at the wolves. One of the two, seeing this white ghost of a sheep flying toward them, tried to seize it in his teeth, but as he was expecting a heavy weight and that was just an empty skin, he lost his balance and also ended by breaking claws and neck on the ground."

"There's still one left."

". . . There's still one left—but as my clothes had suddenly been so lightened by throwing away that jacket, a fit of sneezing came over me, to shake heaven and earth. At this sudden unexpected eruption, the wolf got such a shock that he fell from the tree and broke his neck too . . ."

Thus my brother on his night of battle. What is certain is that the fever he caught as a result, ailing as he already was, very nearly proved fatal. For some days he lay between life and death, tended at the expense of the Commune of Ombrosa, in sign of gratitude. He was put into a hammock, and surrounded by doctors going up and down on ladders. The best doctors available were called into consultation, and some gave enemas, some leeches, some mustard plasters, some fomentations. None spoke any more of the Baron of Rondò as mad, but all as one of the greatest brains, one of the outstanding phenomena of the century.

That while he was ill. When he recovered, things changed. Once again, as always before, some said he was wise, some that he was mad. But in fact he was never taken by these vagaries again. He went on printing a weekly paper, no longer called The Bipeds' Monitor but The Reasonable Vertebrate.





} 25 {


I'M NOT sure if at that time a Lodge of Freemasons was already founded at Ombrosa; I myself was initiated into Masonry much later, after the first Napoleonic Campaign, together with a great part of the local upper bourgeoisie and petty nobility, and so I cannot tell when my brother's first relations were with the Lodge. In this connection I will cite an episode which happened more or less at the time I am describing, and which various witnesses would confirm as true.

One day two Spaniards, passing travelers, arrived at Ombrosa. They went to the house of a certain Bartolomeo Cavagna, a pastry cook, a well-known Freemason. They declared themselves, it seems, as brethren of the Lodge of Madrid, so that he took them one night to a meeting of the Ombrosian Masons, which then met by the light of torch and flare in a clearing in the middle of the woods. All this comes from hearsay and speculation; what is certain is that next day, as soon as the two Spaniards came out of their inn, they were followed by Cosimo, who had been watching for them, unseen from the trees above.

The two travelers entered the courtyard of a tavern outside the town gate. Cosimo perched himself on an arbor overhung with wisteria. At a table was sitting a customer waiting for the pair; his face could not be seen, shaded as it was by a black hat with a wide brim. Their three heads, or rather their three hats, nodded over the white square of the tablecloth; and after some confabulation the hand of the unknown man began to write on a narrow piece of paper something dictated by the other two and which, from the order in which the words were set one below the other, appeared to be a list of names.

"Gentlemen, good day to you," said Cosimo. The three hats went up, showing three faces with eyes staring at the man on the trelliswork. But one of the three, the one with the wide brim, dropped his at once, so low that he touched the table with the tip of his nose. My brother just had time to catch a glimpse of features which did not seem unfamiliar to him.

"Buenos días!" exclaimed the two. "But is it a local habit here to introduce oneself to strangers by dropping from the sky like a pigeon? Perhaps you would be good enough to come down and explain!"

"Those high up are clearly seen," said the Baron, "though others trail in the dust to hide their faces."

"May I say, Señor, that none of us are under an obligation to show our faces, just as none of us are to show our rumps."

"For certain kinds of persons, of course, it is a point of honor to hide the face."

"Which, for instance?"

"Spies, to name one!"

The two companions started. The bent man remained motionless, but his voice was heard for the first time. "Or, to name another, members of secret societies . . ." he said slowly.

This remark was open to various interpretations. So Cosimo thought and so he said out loud. "That remark, sir, is open to various interpretations. Did you say 'members of secret societies,' hinting that I am one myself, or hinting that you are, or that we both are, or that neither of us are, or did you say it because whichever way it's taken the remark is useful in terms of my reply?"

"Cómo, Cómo, Cómo?" exclaimed the man with the wide-brimmed hat confusedly, and in his confusion he forgot to keep his head down, and raised it enough to look Cosimo in the eyes. And Cosimo Recognized him; it was Don Sulpicio, the Jesuit, his enemy from the days at Olivabassa!

"Ah! So I was not mistaken. Down with the mask, Reverend Father!" exclaimed the Baron.

"You! I was sure of it!" exclaimed the Spaniard, and took off his hat and bowed, disclosing his tonsure. "Don Sulpicio de Guadalete, Superior de la Compañía de Jesús"

"Cosimo di Rondò, Freemason!"

The two other Spaniards also introduced themselves with slight bows.

"Don Calisto!"

"Don Fulgencio!"

"Also Jesuits?"

"Nosotros también!"

"But has not your order recently been dissolved by order of the Pope?"

"Not as a respite to libertines and heretics of your stamp!" exclaimed Don Sulpicio, unsheathing his sword.

They were Spanish Jesuits, who after the disbandment of the Order had gone into hiding and were trying to form an armed militia all over the countryside, to combat Theism and the new ideas.

Cosimo put his hand on the hilt of his sword. A number of people had formed a ring around. "Be good enough to descend, if you wish to fight caballerosamente" said the Spaniard.

Nearby was a wood of nut trees. It was the time of the crop and the peasants had hung sheets from one tree to another, to gather the nuts they beat down. Cosimo rushed on to a nut tree, jumped into the sheet, and managed to keep upright and prevent his feet from slipping on the cloth of this hammock-like support.

"You come up a span or two, Don Sulpicio, as I've come down farther than I usually do!" and he, too, drew his sword.

The Spaniard also jumped onto the outstretched sheet. It was difficult to keep upright, as the sheet tended to fold up like a sack around their bodies, but so heated were the two contestants that they managed to cross swords.

"To the Greater Glory of God!"

"To the Glory of the Great Architect of the Universe!"

And they set on each other.

"Before I plunge this blade into your gullet," said Cosimo, "give me news of the Señorita Ursula."

"She died in a convent!"

Cosimo was disturbed by this news (which, however, I think was made up on the spot) and the ex-Jesuit profited by this devilish trick. He swung out at one of the knots tied to the branches of the nut tree and sustaining the sheet on Cosimo's side, and cut it clean through. Cosimo would have fallen had he not quickly flung himself on to the sheet in Don Sulpicio's part and seized a rope. In his leap his sword pierced the Spaniard's guard and plunged into his stomach. Don Sulpicio slumped, slithered down the sheet on to the side where he had cut the knot, and fell to the ground. Cosimo pulled himself back on to the nut tree. The other two ex-Jesuits raised their companion—whether dead or just wounded was never known—hurried off and were never seen again.

A crowd formed round the blood-spattered sheet. And from that day my brother had the reputation of being a Freemason.

Due to the Society's secrecy I never got to know more. When I entered it, as I said, I heard Cosimo spoken of as an old-time brother whose relations with the Lodge were not quite clear, and whom some defined as inactive, some as a heretic who had switched to another sect, some even as an apostate; but his past activities were always mentioned with great respect. He may even have been that legendary Master "Woodpecker Mason," to whom was attributed the foundation of the Lodge called "East of Ombrosa," and the description of the first rites of that Lodge seem to show his influence; suffice it to say that the neophytes were blindfolded, made to climb a tree, then dropped on the end of a rope.

It is certain that the first meetings of Freemasons with us took place at night in the midst of the woods. So Cosimo's presence would have been more than justified, whether he was the person who received from correspondents abroad the volumes of the Masonic Constitutions, or whether it was someone else who had been initiated, possibly in France or England, who introduced the rites into Ombrosa too. It is possible, though, that Masonry had existed here for some time unknown to Cosimo, and that one night, moving about the trees in the wood, he happened by chance on a clearing where there was a meeting of men with strange vestments and instruments by the light of candles, and he stopped up there to listen and then intervened and confused them by some unexpected remark, such as: "If you put up a wall, think of what's left outside!" (a phrase which I often heard him repeat), or another one of his, and the Masons, recognizing his superior insight, made him a member of their Lodge, with special duties, and he brought in a great number of new rites and symbols.

The fact is that for the whole period my brother had anything to do with it, the open-air Masonry (as I will call it to distinguish it from that which was later to meet in a closed building) had a much richer ritual, in which a part was played by owls, telescopes, pine cones, hydraulic pumps, mushrooms, little Cartesian devils, cobwebs, Pythagorean tables. There was also a certain show of skulls, not only of humans, but also of cows, wolves and eagles. Such objects and others, such as the trowels, rulers and compasses of the normal Masonic liturgy, were found at that time hanging on to branches in strange juxtapositions, and also attributed to the Baron's madness. Only a few persons hinted that this rebus now had a more serious meaning; but anyway, no one was ever able to trace a clear distinction between the earlier and later symbols, or exclude the possibility that from the first they had been esoteric symbols of some other secret society.

For long before Cosimo joined the Masons, he had been in various associations and confraternities of trades and professions, such as St. Crispin's or the Shoemakers', the Virtuous Coopers', the Just Armorers' or the Conscientious Capmakers'. As he made on his own nearly everything he needed to live with, he knew a great variety of trades, and could boast himself a member of many guilds, which on their part were pleased to have with them a member of a noble family, of unusual talents and proved disinterest.

How this passion which Cosimo always showed for communal life fitted in with his perpetual flight from society, I have never properly understood, and it remains not the least of his singularities of character. One would say that the more determined he was to hide away in his den of branches, the more he felt the need to create new links with the human race. But although every now and again he flung himself, body and soul, into organizing a new fellowship, suggesting detailed rules and aims, choosing the aptest men for every job, his comrades never knew how far they could count on him, where they could meet him, and when he would be suddenly urged back into the bird side of his nature and let himself be caught no more. Perhaps, if one tried, one could take these contradictory impulses back to a single impulse. One should remember that he was just as contrary to every kind of human organization flourishing at the time, and so he fled from them all and tried experiments with new ones. But none of these seemed right or different enough from the others. From this came his constant periods of utter wildness.

What he had in mind was an idea of a universal society. And every time he busied himself getting people together, either for a definite purpose such as guarding against fire or defending from wolves, or in confraternities of trades such as the Perfect Wheelwrights or the Enlightened Skin Tanners, since he always got them to meet in the woods, at night, around a tree from which he would preach, there was always an air of conspiracy, of sect, of heresy, and in that atmosphere his speeches also passed easily from particular to general, and from the simple rules of some manual trade moved far too easily to a plan for installing a world republic of men—equal, free and just.

So Cosimo did little more in Masonry than to repeat what he had done in the other secret or semi-secret societies of which he had been a member. And when a certain Lord Liverpuck, sent by the Grand Lodge of London to visit his brethren on the continent, came to Ombrosa while my brother was Master, he was so scandalized by Cosimo's unorthodoxy that he wrote to tell London that this Ombrosa Masonry must be some new Masonry of the Scottish rite financed by the Stuarts to use propaganda against the Hanoverian throne, for a Jacobite restoration.

After this came the incident I have described, of the two Spanish travelers who introduced themselves to Bartolomeo Cavagna as Masons. Invited to a meeting of the Lodge, they found it all quite normal, in fact they said it was just like the Orient of Madrid. It was this which roused the suspicion of Cosimo, who knew only too well how much of the ritual was his own invention; that is why he tracked down the spies, unmasked them and triumphed over his old enemy, Don Sulpicio.

Anyway, my opinion is that these changes in liturgy were a personal need of his own, for he could just as easily have taken the symbols of every trade, except that of mason, he who had never wanted nor built nor inhabited any houses with walls.





} 26 {


OMBROSA was also a land of vines. I have never mentioned this, as in following Cosimo I have always had to keep to vegetation with high trunks. But there were vast slopes of vines, and in August under the festooned leaves the rosy grapes swelled in clusters of thick juice that was already wine-colored. Some vines were on arbors. I mention this because as Cosimo became older he had got so small and light and learned so well how to move without throwing all his weight in one place that the crossbars of the pergolas held him. He could thus pass on to the vines, and by supporting himself on the poles called scarasse, could do work, such as pruning in winter, when the vines are like bare hieroglyphics, or in summer thin out the heavy foliage or look for insects, and then in September help with the vintage.

For the vintage the entire population of Ombrosa would come out into the vineyards for the day, and everywhere the green of vines was dappled with the bright colors of skirts and tasseled caps. Muleteers loaded basket after full basket into the panniers and emptied them in the vats; other basketfuls were taken by the various tax collectors, who came with squads of bailiffs to levy dues for the local nobles, the Government of the Republic of Genoa, the clergy and other tithes. Every year there was some row or other.

The question of what parts of crops to allot around was the major reason for the protests set down in the "books of complaints," at the time of the French Revolution. Books like these were also filled up at Ombrosa, just to try it, even if here they were no use at all. This had been one of Cosimo's ideas. At that time he no longer felt any need to attend the meetings of the Lodge and hold discussions with those old stick-in-the-muds of Masons. He was on the trees in the square and all the people from the beaches and countryside around came crowding beneath to get him to explain the news, for he received newspapers by post and also had certain friends who wrote to him, among them the astronomer Bailly, who was later made mayor of Paris, and other club members. Every day there was something new: Necker, and the Tennis Court, and the Bastille, and Lafayette on his white horse, and King Louis disguised as a lackey. Cosimo would explain and act everything out, jumping from branch to branch, and on one branch he would be Mirabeau at the tribune and on another Marat at the Jacobins, and on yet another King Louis at Versailles putting on the Phrygian cap to please the housewives who had come marching out from Paris.

To explain what "books of complaints" were, Cosimo said: "Let's try and make one." He took a school notebook and hung it on the tree by a string; everyone came there and wrote down whatever they found wrong. All sorts of things came out; the fishermen wrote about the price of fish, and the vineyard men about those tithes, and the shepherds about the borders of pastures, and the woodmen about the Commune's woods, and then there were all those who had relatives in prison, and those who had got lashes for some misdeed, and those who had it in for the nobles because of something to do with women; it was endless. Cosimo thought that even if it was a "book of complaints" it need not be quite so glum, and he got the idea of asking everyone to write down what they would like most. And again everyone went to put down their ideas, sometimes rather well. One wrote of the local cakes, one of the local soup; one wanted a blonde, one a couple of brunettes; one would have liked to sleep the whole day through, one to go mushrooming all the year round; some wanted a carriage with four horses, some found a goat enough; some would have liked to see their dead mother again, some to meet the gods on Olympus. In fact, all the good in the world was written down in the exercise-book, or drawn—since as many did not know how to write—or even painted in colors. Cosimo wrote too—a name—Viola. The name he had been writing everywhere for years.

It was a fine exercise-book—full, and Cosimo called it "Book of Complaints and Contents." But when it was all written from cover to cover there was no assembly to send it to, so there it remained hanging on the tree by a string, and when it rained it began to blotch and fade, and the sight made the hearts of the Ombrosians tighten at their present plight, and filled them with desire to rebel.

In fact, all the causes of the French Revolution were present among us too. Only we were not in France, and there was no revolution. We live in a country where causes are always seen but never effects.

At Ombrosa, though, we had some exciting times all the same. The Republican army warred against the Austro-Sardinians almost under our noses. Massena at Collardente, Laharpe on the Nervia, Mouret on the coast road—and Napoleon was then only a general of artillery, so that those rumbles we heard fitfully reaching Ombrosa on the breeze were made by the man himself.

In September they began preparing for the vintage again. And now they seemed to be preparing something secret and terrible. Counsels of war from door to door:

"The grapes are ripe!"

"Ripe! Yes, indeed!"

"Ripe as ripe! They need picking!"

"We'll go and get 'em!"

"We're all ready. Where will you be?"

"In the vineyard beyond the bridge. And you? And you?"

"In Count Pina's."

"I in the vineyard by the mill."

"Have you seen the number of bailiffs? They seem like blackbirds dropping to pick the grapes!"

"But they won't peck this year!"

"If there are so many blackbirds, we're just as many hunters!"

"Some of us daren't come! Some are running away."

"Why is it so many people don't like the vintage this year?"

"They wanted to put it off here. But now the grapes are ripe!"

"They're ripe!"

Next day, though, the vintage began silently. The vineyards were crowded with chains of people under the festoons, but no song went up. A call or two, a shout of "You here too? It's ripe!" a movement of groups, a touch of gloom—even in the sky, which was not entirely overcast, just rather cloudy—and if a voice struck up a song it soon faded off, not taken up by the chorus. The muleteers were taking the panniers full of grapes to the vats. In other years the dues for the nobles, the bishop and the government were set aside beforehand; this year, though, they seemed to have been forgotten.

The tax collectors, come to draw the tithes, were nervous, did not know quite what to do. The more time passed, the less happened. The more they felt something must happen, the more the bailiffs realized they had to do something but the less they understood what it was.

Cosimo was walking along the pergolas with his cat's tread. He was carrying some scissors and cutting off a bunch here and a bunch there, haphazardly, offering them to the men and women vintaging below, and saying something to each in a low voice.

The chief of the bailiffs could bear the tension no more. He said: "Eh, well, now, then, what about these tithes?" Scarcely had he said this than he had already regretted it. Through the vineyards rang a deep note, part bellow, part hiss; it was a vintager blowing on a conch shell and sounding the alarm all over the valley. From every hillock similar sounds replied. The vintagers raised up their shells like trumpets, and Cosimo, too, from the top of a pergola.

A song went along the rows of vines; first broken, discordant, so it was difficult to understand. Then the voices fused, harmonized, took up the tune and sang as if they were running, flying along, and the men and women standing stock-still half hidden among the vines and each pole's vine cluster and grape seemed to run, and the grapes to be vintaging themselves, flinging themselves into the vats and treading themselves down. And the air, the clouds, the sun, all became unfermented juice; and now the song began to be understood, first the notes and then some of the words, which went: "Ça ira! Ça ira! Ça ira!" And the young men pounded the grapes with their bare red feet—"Ça ira!"— and the girls thrust their sharp dagger-like scissors into the thick greenery, wounding the twisted stalks of the grape clusters—"Ça ira!"—and clouds of gnats flew above the heaps of fruit ready for the press—"Ça ira!" And it was then that the bailiffs lost control of themselves and called: "Stop that! Silence! Enough of this row! Whoever sings we shoot!" And they began firing rounds in the air.

In reply came a rumble of gunfire that seemed to come from regiments lined in battle order on the hills. All the muskets of Ombrosa exploded, and from the top of a high fig tree Cosimo sounded the charge on a conch shell. All over the hillsides people moved. It was impossible to distinguish now between vintage and crowd: men, grapes, women, sprigs, clippers, festoons, scarasse, muskets, baskets, horses, barbed wire, fists, mule's kicks, shins, teats—all singing "Ça ira!"

"Here are your tithes!" It ended with the bailiffs and tax collectors being thrust head over heels into the vats full of grapes, their legs sticking out kicking wildly. And they returned without having gathered a thing, smeared from head to foot with grape juice, and with pips, husks, stalks stuck all over their muskets, powder pouches and mustaches.

Then the vintage turned into a fête, with all convinced of their having abolished feudal privileges once and for all. Meanwhile we nobles and petty squires had barricaded ourselves in our houses, armed to the teeth and ready to sell our skins dear. (I, in truth, did no more than keep my nose inside our gates, above all to avoid giving the other nobles a chance to say I was in agreement with that Antichrist of a brother of mine, reputed the worst agitator and Jacobin in the whole area.) But that day, once the troops and tax collectors had been flung out, no one else was hurt.

Everyone was deep in preparing celebrations. They even put up a Tree of Liberty, just to follow the mode from France; only they weren't quite sure what it was like, and then there were so many trees in our parts that it was scarcely worth while putting up a false one. So they dressed up a real tree, an elm, with flowers, clusters of grapes, festoons and placards: "Vive la Grande Nation!" From the very tip my brother, in a tricolor cockade on his cat's-fur cap, delivered a lecture on Rousseau and Voltaire, of which not a single word could be heard, as the whole population was twirling round beneath singing "Ça ira!"

The gaiety was short-lived. Troops came in great strength. Genoese, to exact dues and guarantee territorial neutrality, and Austro-Sardinians too, as the rumor had got around that the Jacobins of Ombrosa intended to proclaim the place annexed to the "Great Universal Nation," that is, to the Republic of France. The rebels tried to resist, built a barricade or two, shut the town gates. . . But no, more than that was needed! The troops passed into the place on every side, set up block-posts on every country lane, and those with the reputation of agitators were imprisoned, except for Cosimo, who would have needed a devil to catch him, and a few others with him.

The trial of the revolutionaries was hastily set up, but the accused succeeded in showing that they had nothing whatsoever to do with it and that the real leaders were the very ones who had decamped. So everyone was freed, particularly as with all those troops stationed at Ombrosa no more unrest was to be feared. A garrison of Austro-Sardinians stayed too, as a guarantee against any possible enemy infiltration, and in command of these was our brother-in-law, D'Estomac, the husband of Battista, emigrated from France in the suite of the Comte de Provence.

So I found my sister Battista underfoot again, with what reaction I leave you to imagine. She installed herself in the house, with husband, horses, orderlies. And every evening she would spend describing the last executions in Paris; she even had a model of a guillotine, with a real blade, and to explain the end of all her friends and relations-in-law she would decapitate lizards, centipedes, worms and even mice. So we would spend our evenings. I envied Cosimo living his days and nights out in the open, hidden in some wood.





} 27 {


SO MANY and so incredible were the tales Cosimo told about his activities in the woods during the war that I cannot really accept outright any one version. So I leave the word to him, and just faithfully report some of his stories.

"In the woods there used to patrol scouting parties from both the opposing armies. From up on the branches, at every step I heard crashing through the undergrowth, I would strain my ears to guess if they were Austro-Sardinians or French.

"A little Austrian lieutenant with very fair hair, was in command of a patrol of soldiers in perfect uniforms—queues and tassels, tricorns and gaiters, crossed white bands, muskets and bayonets—and making them march along in double file, trying to keep them in step on the rough paths. Ignorant of what the woods were like, but certain of carrying out his orders punctiliously, the little officer was proceeding according to the lines traced on the map, banging his nose continually against tree trunks, the troops slipping with their hobnailed boots on the smooth stones or gouging their eyes out with brambles, but conscious always of the supremacy of the imperial arms.

"Magnificent soldiers they were. I waited for them at a clearing, hidden on a pine. In my hand I had a heavy pine cone which I dropped on the head of the last man in the file. The soldier threw up his arms, his knees buckled and down he fell among the ferns of the undergrowth. No one noticed and the platoon continued its march.

"I caught up with them again. This time I threw down a rolled-up porcupine on the head of a corporal. The corporal's head sagged and he fainted. This time the lieutenant saw what happened, sent two men to fetch a stretcher, and pressed on.

"The patrol, as if on purpose, went and got entangled in the thickest juniper bushes in the whole wood. And a new ambush was ready there too. I had collected some caterpillars in a piece of paper, the hairy, blue sort, whose touch makes the skin swell worse than a nettle, and poured a hundred or so down on them. The platoon passed, vanished in thick bushes, re-emerged scratching themselves, with hands and knees covered with little red bubbles, and marched on.

"Splendid troops, a splendid officer! The whole wood was so strange to him that he could not distinguish what was unusual about it, and proceeded with his decimated cadres, but proud and indomitable as ever. Then I had recourse to a family of wild cats; I launched them by their tails, after swinging them in the air a bit, which goaded them to a frenzy. There was a lot of noise, especially feline, then silence and truce. The Austrians were tending their wounded. Then the patrol, white with bandages, started off on the march again.

"'The only thing is to try and take them prisoners!' said I to myself, hurrying to get ahead of them, and hoping to find a French patrol to warn of the enemy approach. But the French had not been giving any sign of life on that front for some time.

"While I was getting over a slippery place, I saw something move. I stopped, and pricked up my ears. I heard a kind of bubbling stream which then ran on into a continual gurgle and I began distinguishing the words: 'Mais alors . . . 'cré-nom-de . . . foutez-moi-donc . . . tu m'emmer . . . quoi. . ..' Squinting into the half-darkness, I saw that the soft vegetation below was composed chiefly of hairy busbies and flowing mustaches and beards. It was a squadron of French hussars. Having been soaked with damp during the winter campaign, toward spring all their hats were sprouting with mildew and moss.

"In command of this outpost was Lieutenant Agrippa Papillon, of Rouen, poet, and volunteer in the Republican Army. Convinced of the general goodness of nature, Lieutenant Papillon told his soldiers not to crunch the pine needles, the chestnut cones, the twigs, the leaves, the snails which stuck on to his men as they crossed the wood. And the patrol was already so fused with surrounding nature that it needed my well-trained eye to spot them at all.

"Amid his bivouacking soldiers, the officer-poet, with long hair in ringlets framing his gaunt face under the cocked hat, was declaiming to the woods: 'O Forest! O Night! Here I am in your power! Could a tender tendril of your maidenhair fern, clasped to the ankles of these doughty soldiers, not hold the destiny of France? O, Valmy! How far away you are!'

"I came forward. 'Pardon, citoyen.'

"'Who is it? Who's there?'

"A patriot of these woods, citizen officer.'

"'Ah! Here? Where?'

"'Right over your nose, citizen officer.'

"'So I see! Who is it? A bird-man, progeny of the Harpies! Are you a creature of mythology?'

"'I am Citizen Rondò, progeny of humans, I assure you, on father's and mother's side, citizen officer. In fact my mother was a brave soldier in the Wars of Succession.'

"'I understand. O Times, O Glory! I believe you, citizen, and I am anxious to hear the news which you appear to have come to announce.'

"'An Austrian patrol is penetrating your lines!'

"'What d'you say? To battle then! 'Tis the hour! O Stream, gentle stream, ah, soon you will be stained with blood! On, On! To arms!'

"At the lieutenant-poet's command the hussars began gathering up arms and equipment, but they moved in such a scatterbrained and sluggish way, stretching, spitting, swearing, that I began to have doubts of their military efficiency.

"'Citizen officer, have you a plan?'

"'A plan? To march on the enemy!'

"'Yes, but how?'

"'How? In closed ranks!'

"'Well, if you will allow me to give advice, I would keep the soldiers halted, in open order, and let the enemy patrol entrap itself!'

"Lieutenant Papillon was an accommodating fellow and made no objections to my plan. The hussars, scattered about the wood, could be scarcely distinguished from clumps of verdure, and the Austrian lieutenant was certainly the man least adapted to see the difference. The imperialist patrol was marching along according to the itinerary traced out on the map, with every now and again a brusque 'To the right!' or To the left!' So they passed under the noses of the French hussars without noticing them. Silently the hussars, producing only natural sounds such as the rustles of leaves and the flutter of wings, arranged themselves for an encircling maneuver. I kept sentry for them from above and made whistles and stoats' cries to signal the enemy troop movements, and the short cuts ours had to take. The Austrians, all unawares, were caught in a trap.

"Suddenly they heard a shout from a tree. 'Halt there! In the name of liberty, equality and fraternity. I declare you all prisoners!' And between the branches appeared a human ghost brandishing a long-barreled hunting gun.

"'Urrah! Vive la Nation!' And all the bushes around sprouted French hussars, with Lieutenant Papillon at their head.

"Deep oaths resounded from the Austro-Sardinians, but before they had a chance to react they were disarmed. The Austrian lieutenant, pale but head high surrendered his sword to his enemy colleague."

"I became quite a useful auxiliary to the Republican Army, but preferred to go about things alone, with the help of the animals of the forest, like the time when I put an Austrian column to flight by tipping a nest of wasps on their heads.

"My reputation spread to the Austro-Sardinian camp, exaggerated to such a point that the woods were said to be packed with armed Jacobins, hidden on top of every tree. Wherever they went, the royal and imperial troops were on the qui-vive; at the slightest plop of chestnuts dropping from their husks and the faintest squirrel's squeak, they already felt themselves surrounded by Jacobins, and changed their route. In this way, just by provoking almost imperceptible rustles and sounds, I caused the Piedmontese and Austrians' columns to deviate and succeeded in leading them by the nose wherever I wanted.

"One day I got a column of them to a thick prickly copse and made them all lose their way. In the copse lived a family of wild boar. Driven from the mountains by the boom of cannon, the boars were descending in droves to take refuge in the woods lower down. The lost Austrians were marching along without being able to see a hand's-breadth in front of their noses, and suddenly hairy boars sprung up everywhere under their feet, emitting piercing cries. Snouts thrust out, they flung themselves between the knees of every soldier, pushing them all head over heels and stamping on the fallen in an avalanche of pointed hoofs, and piercing their stomachs with tusks. The entire battalion was routed. I, and my comrades, from our perch on the trees, followed them with musket fire. Those who managed to get back to camp said either an earthquake had suddenly opened the thorny ground under their feet, or that they'd been attacked by a band of Jacobins sprung from the bowels of the earth, as these Jacobins were nothing but devils, half man and half beast, who lived on the trees or in the midst of bushes.

"As I said, I preferred to carry out my coups alone, or with a few comrades from Ombrosa who had taken refuge with me in the woods after that vintage. With the French army I tried to have as little to do as possible, as we know what armies are, every time they move there's some disaster. But I had taken rather a liking to that outpost of Lieutenant Papillon and was rather worried about what might happen to them. For the immobility of the front threatened to be fatal to the squadron under the poet's command. Moss and lichen were growing on the troopers' uniforms, and sometimes even heather and fern; the tops of the busbies were nested in by screech owls, or sprouted and flowered with lilies of the valley; their thigh boots clotted with soil into compact clogs. The whole platoon was about to take root. Lieutenant Agrippa Papillon's yielding attitude toward nature was sinking that squad of brave men into a fusion of animal and vegetable.

"They had to be awakened. How, though? I had an idea and went to Lieutenant Papillon to propose it. The poet was declaiming to the moon:

"'O Moon! round as a muzzle, like a cannon ball whose thrust from gunpowder is exhausted and continues to rotate slowly and silently through the sky! When will you burst on us, O Moon, raising a high cloud of dust and sparks, submerging enemy armies and thrones, and opening a breach of glory for me in the compact wall of my fellow citizens' distrust of me! O Rouen! O moon! O fate! O convention! O frogs! O girls! O life!'

"And I: 'Citoyen. . .'

"Papillon, annoyed at my constant interruptions, said sharply: 'Well?'

"'I only wanted to suggest, citizen officer, a way of rousing your men from a lethargy which is getting dangerous.'

"'I wish to heaven there were, citizen. Action is what I yearn for, as you see. And what might this way of yours be?'

"'Fleas, citizen officer.'

"'I'm sorry to disillusion you, citizen. There are no fleas in the Republican Army. They've all died of famine as a result of the blockade and high cost of living.'

"'I can supply some, citizen officer.'

"'I don't know if it's sense or a joke you're making. Anyway I will report the matter to Higher Command, and we shall see. Citizen, my thanks for your help to the republican cause! O glory! O Rouen! O fleas! O moon!' and he went off raving.

"I realized I had to act on my own initiative. So I collected a lot of fleas, and as soon as I saw a French hussar I'd shoot one at him with a catapult, trying to aim accurately enough to get it into his collar. Then I began to sprinkle the whole unit, in handfuls. It was a dangerous mission, for had I been caught in the act, no reputation of mine as a patriot would have saved me. They would have taken me prisoner, dragged me off to France and guillotined me as an emissary of Pitt. Instead of which my intervention was providential. The itching of the fleas quickly kindled in the hussars a human and civilized need to scratch themselves, search themselves, delouse themselves. They flung away their mossy clothes, their packs and knapsacks covered with mushrooms and cobwebs, washed, shaved, combed, in fact reacquired a perception of their individual humanity and regained the sense of civilization, of enfranchisement from the ugly side of nature. They were spurred, too, by a stimulus to activity, a zeal, a combativity long forgotten. The attack, when it came, found them pervaded by this new zest: the Armies of the Republic overcame the enemy resistance, broke through the front; and advanced to the victories of Dego and Millesimo . . ."





} 28 {


OUR sister and the emigré D'Estomac escaped from Ombrosa just in time to avoid capture by the Republican Army. The people of Ombrosa seemed to have returned to those days of the vintage. They raised the Tree of Liberty, this time more in conformity to French example, that is, a little like a Tree of Plenty. Cosimo, it goes without saying, climbed onto it, with a Phrygian cap on his head; but he soon got tired and left.

There was some rioting around the palaces of the nobles, a few cries of "Aristó, aristó, string 'em up. Ça ira!" Me, what with my being my brother's brother and our always having been nobles of little account, they left in peace. Later on, in fact, they came to consider me as a patriot too (so that, at the next change, I was in trouble myself).

They set up a municipalité, a maire, in the French style; my brother was nominated to the provisional junta, although many did not agree with this, considering him to be out of his wits. Those of the old régime laughed and said that the whole lot were a cageful of lunatics.

The sittings of the junta were held in the former palace of the Genoese governor. Cosimo would perch on a carob which was the same height as the windows and follow the discussion from there. Sometimes he intervened to protest and give his vote. It is an acknowledged fact that revolutionaries are greater sticklers for formality than conservatives. They found Cosimo objectionable and his system of attendance unworkable, said that it lessened the decorum of the assembly, and so on. When the Ligurian Republic was set up in place of the oligarchic Republic of Genoa, my brother was not elected to the new administration.

Cosimo, by the way, had at that time written and published a "Constitutional Project for a Republican City with a Declaration of the Rights of Men, Women, Children, Domestic and Wild Animals, Including Birds, Fishes and Insects, and All Vegetation, whether Trees, Vegetables, or Grass." It was a very fine work, which could have been a useful guide to any government; but which no one took any notice of, and it remained a dead letter.

Most of his time, however, Cosimo still spent in the woods, where the sappers of the French Army were opening a road for the transport of artillery. With their long beards flowing under their busbies and merging into their leather aprons, the sappers were different from all the other troops. Perhaps this was due to the fact that they did not leave behind them all that trail of disaster and destruction (like other troops), but had the satisfaction of doing things that remained and the ambition to carry them out as best they could. Then they had so many stories to tell. They had crossed nations, seen sieges and battles; some of them had even been present at the recent great events in Paris—the storming of the Bastille and the guillotinings—and Cosimo used to spend his evenings listening to them. On putting away their spades and stakes they would sit around a fire, Smoking short pipes and digging up old memories.

By day, Cosimo used to help the surveyors mark out the track. No one was better fitted to do so than he; he knew all the places where the road could pass with the gentlest gradients and the lowest loss of trees. And he always bore in mind not so much the needs of the French artillery as of the population of those roadless parts. At least one advantage would come from all the passage of brutal and plundering soldiery—a road made at their expense.

This was no bad thing at the time, either; for by then, the occupation troops, particularly since they had changed their name from republican to imperial, were a pain in the neck to all. And all went to the patriots to complain—"Just see what your friends are doing!" And the patriots would fling up their arms and raise their eyes to the sky, and reply: "Oh, well! Soldiers! Let's hope it all blows over!"

The Napoleonic troops would requisition pigs, cows, even goats, from the stalls. And as for taxes and tithes, they were worse than before. On top of everything, conscription started. This having to go as a soldier, no one could understand round our way; and the called-up youths would take refuge in the woods.

Cosimo did what he could to help out. He would watch over cattle in the woods when the peasant owners sent them into the wilds for fear of a roundup; or he would guard clandestine loads of wheat on their way to the mill or olives to the press, so that the Napoleonic troops should not get a part; or show the youths called to the service caves in the woods where they could hide. In fact, he tried to defend people against hectoring, although he never made any attacks against the occupying troops, in spite of the armed bands which were beginning to wander around the woods making life difficult for the French. Cosimo, stubborn as he was, refused ever to retract, and having been a friend of the French before, went on thinking he must be loyal to them, even if so much had changed and all was so different from what he expected. Then one should also remember that he was no longer as young as he used to be, and did not put himself out much now, for either side.

Napoleon went to Milan to get himself crowned, and then made a few journeys through Italy. In every town he passed people gave him a great welcome and took him to see the local sights. At Ombrosa they also put in the program a visit to the "patriot on the treetops," for, as often happens, none of us bothered much about Cosimo, but he was very famous in the world outside, particularly abroad.

It was not a chance encounter. Everything was arranged beforehand by the municipal committee for the celebrations, so as to make a good impression. They chose a fine big tree. They wanted an oak, but the one most suitably placed was a walnut, so they tricked this up with a few oak branches, and hung it with ribbons in the French tricolor and the Lombard tricolor, cockades and frills. In the middle of all this they perched my brother, dressed in gala rig but wearing his characteristic cat's-fur cap, with a squirrel on his shoulder.

Everything was set for ten o'clock and a big crowd was waiting around the tree, but of course Napoleon did not appear till half-past eleven, to the great annoyance of my brother, who as he got older was beginning to suffer from bladder trouble and had to get behind the trunk every now and again to urinate.

Came the Emperor, with a suite all shimmering epaulettes. It was already midday. Napoleon looked up between the branches toward Cosimo and found the sun in his eyes. And he began to address a few suitable phrases to Cosimo: "Je sais trés bien de vous, citoyen. . ." and he shaded his eyes, "parmi les forêts. . ." and he gave a little skip to one side so that the sun did not come right into his eyes, "parmi les frondaisons de notre luxuriante. . ." and he gave another skip the other way as Cosimo's bow of assent had bared the sun on him again.

Seeing Bonaparte so restless, Cosimo asked politely: "Is there anything I can do for you, mon Empereur?"

"Yes, yes," said Napoleon, "keep over that side a bit, will you, to shade the sun off me. There, that's right, keep still now. . .." Then he fell silent as if struck by some thought, and turned to the Viceroy Eugène. "All this reminds me of something . . . something I've seen before."

Cosimo came to his help. "Not you, Majesty; it was Alexander the Great."

"Ah, of course!" exclaimed Napoleon. "The meeting of Alexander and Diogenes!"

"You never forget your Plutarch, mon Empereur," said Beauharnais.

"Only that time," added Cosimo, "it was Alexander who asked Diogenes what he could do and Diogenes asked him to move . . ."

Napoleon gave a flick of the fingers as if he had finally found the phrase he was looking for. Assuring himself with a glance that the dignitaries of his suite were listening, he said in excellent Italian: "Were I not the Emperor Napoleon, I would like to be the citizen Cosimo Rondò!"

And he turned and went. The suite followed with a great clinking of spurs.

That was all. One might have expected that within a week Cosimo would have been sent the cross of the Legion of Honor. My brother did not care a rap about that, but it would have given us pleasure in the family.





} 29 {


YOUTH soon passes on earth, so imagine it on the trees, where it is the fate of everything to fall: leaves, fruit. Cosimo was growing old. All the years, all the nights spent in the cold, the wind, the rain, under fragile shelters or nothing at all, surrounded by air, without ever a house, a fire, a warm dish . . . He was getting to be a shriveled old man, with bandy legs and long monkey-like arms, hunchbacked, sunk in a fur cloak topped by a hood, like a hairy friar. His face was baked by the sun, creased as a chestnut; with clear round eyes among the wrinkles.

The army of Napoleon was put to rout at the Beresina. The British fleet landed at Genoa. We spent the days waiting for news of reverses. Cosimo did not show himself at Ombrosa; he was crouching in a pine tree in the woods overlooking the Sappers' Road, where the guns had passed toward Marengo, and looking toward the east, over the deserted surface on which only shepherds with their goats or mules loaded with wood were to be seen. What was he waiting for? Napoleon he had seen, he knew how the Revolution had ended, there was nothing to expect now but the worst. And yet there he was, eyes fixed, as if at any moment the Imperial Army would appear round the bend, still covered with Russian icicles, and Bonaparte on horseback, his unshaven chin sunk in his chest, feverish, pale. . . He would stop under the pine tree (behind him a confusion of smothered steps, a clattering of packs and rifles on the ground, exhausted soldiers taking off boots by the roadside, unwinding rags round their feet) and he would say: "You were right, Citizen Rondò; give me the constitutions you wrote out, give me your advice to which neither the Directorate nor the Consulate nor the Empire would listen; let us begin again from the beginning, raise the Tree of Liberty once more, save the universal nation!" These were surely the dreams, the aspirations, of Cosimo.

Instead, one day, three figures came limping along the Sappers' Road from the east. One, lame, was supporting himself on a crutch; another's head was wrapped in a turban of bandages; the third was the halest, as he only had a black patch over one eye. The filthy rags they wore, the tattered braid hanging from their chests, the cocked hats without cockades but with a plume still on one of them, the high boots rent all the way up the leg, seemed to have belonged to uniforms of the Napoleonic Guard. But they had no arms; or, rather, one was brandishing an empty scabbard; the second had a gun barrel on his shoulder, like a stick with a bundle on it. They came on singing: "De mon pays. . . De mon pays . . . De mon pays . . ." like a trio of drunks.

"Hey, strangers," shouted my brother at them, "who are you?"

"What an odd bird! What are you doing up there. Eating pine kernels?"

And the second: "Who wants pine kernels? Famished as we are, d'you expect us to eat pine kernels?"

"And the thirst! We got that from eating snow!"

"We are the Third Regiment of Hussars!"

"To a man!"

"All that's left!"

"Three out of three hundred; not bad!"

"Well, I've made it and that's enough for me!"

"Ah, it's too early to say that, you're not home yet with a whole skin!"

"A plague on you!"

"We are the victors of Austerlitz!"

"And the botched of Vilna! Hurrah!"

"Hey, talking bird, tell us where there's a tavern around here!"

"We've emptied the wine barrels of half of Europe but can't get rid of our thirst!"

"That's because we're riddled with bullets, and the wine flows straight through us!"

"You know where you're riddled!"

"A tavern that would give us credit!"

"We'll come back and pay another time!"

"Napoleon will pay!"

"Prrr. . ."

"The Czar will pay! He's coming along behind. Hand him the bills!"

Cosimo said: "There's no wine around here, but farther on there's a stream and you can quench your thirst."

"May you drown in the stream, you owl!"

"If I hadn't lost my musket in the Vistula River I'd have shot you down by now and cooked you on the spit like a thrush!"

"Wait a bit, will you: I'm going to get my feet in that stream, they're burning."

"You can wash your behind in it, for all I care."

But all three of them went to the stream, to take off their boots, bathe their feet, wash their faces and clothes. Soap they got from Cosimo, who was one of those people who get cleaner as they get older, as they are seized by a self-disgust which they did not notice in youth; so he always took soap around with him. The cool water cleared the fumes of alcohol a little in the three. And as the drunkenness passed, they were overwhelmed by the gloom of their state and heaved a sigh; but in their dejection the limpid water became a joy, and they splashed about in it, singing: "De mon pays . . . De mon pays. . ."

Cosimo had returned to his lookout post on the edge of the road. He heard galloping and a squadron of light horse appeared, raising dust. They were in uniforms he had never seen before; and under their heavy busbies could be seen fair-skinned faces, bearded and rather gaunt, with half-closed green eyes. Cosimo doffed his cap to them. "What good wind, sirs?"

They stopped. "Sdrastvuy! Say, batjuska, how long more before we get there?"

"Sdrastvujte, soldiers," said Cosimo, who had learned a bit of every language and Russian too. "Kuda vam? to get where?"

"To get wherever this road goes to . . ."

"Oh, this road goes to so many places. Where are you going?"

"V Pariz."

"Well, there are better routes to Paris."

"Niet, nie Pariz. Vo Frantsiu, za Napoleonom. Kuda vedjot eta doroga?"

"Oh, to so many places: Olivabassa, Sassocorto, Trappa . . . "

"Tchto? Aliviabasse? Niet, niet!"

"Well, if you want to, you can get to Marseilles . . ."

"V Marsel . . . da, da, Marsel . . . Frantsia. . ."

"And what are you going to do in France?"

"Napoleon came to war on our Czar, and now our Czar is chasing Napoleon."

"And where do you come from?"

"Iz Charkova. Iz Kieva. Iz Rostova."

"What nice places you must have seen! And which d'you like more, here or in Russia?"

"Nice places, ugly places, all the same to us, we like Russia!"

A gallop, a cloud of dust, and a horse pulled up, ridden by an officer, who shouted at the Cossacks: "Von! Marsh! Kto vam pozvolil ostanovitsja?"

"Do svidanja, batjuska!" said the troopers to Cosimo, "Nam pora.. and spurred away.

The officer had remained there at the foot of the pine tree. He was tall, slim, with a noble and sad air; he was holding his bare head raised toward a sky veined with clouds.

"Bonjour, monsieur," he said to Cosimo. "So you know our language?"

"Da, gospodin ofitser," replied my brother, "but not more than you do French, all the same."

"Are you an inhabitant of this country? Were you here while Napoleon was about?"

"Yes, monsieur l'officier."

"How did that go?"

"You know, monsieur, armies always loot, whatever the ideas they bring."

"Yes, we too do a lot of looting . . . but we don't bring ideas. . ."

He was sad and worried, though a victor. Cosimo liked him and tried to console him. "You have won!"

"Yes. We fought well. Very well. But perhaps . . ." Suddenly yells broke out, rifle fire, a clash of arms. "Kto tam?" exclaimed the officer. The Cossacks returned, dragging over the ground some half-naked corpses, and holding something in their hands, their left hands (the right were grasping wide curved scimitars, bared and—yes—dripping with blood), and this something was the hairy heads of those three drunken hussars. "Frantsuzy! Napoleon! All dead!"

The young officer barked out a sharp order, and made them take the things away.

"You see . . . War. . . For years now I've been dealing as best I can with a thing that in itself is appalling; war. . . and all this for ideals which I shall never, perhaps, be able to explain fully to myself . . ."

"I too," replied Cosimo, "have lived many years for ideals which I would never be able to explain to myself; but I do something entirely good. I live on trees."

The officer's mood had suddenly changed from melancholy to nervous. "Well," he said, "I must be moving on." He gave a military salute. "Adieu, monsieur. . . What is your name?"

"Le Baron Cosime de Rondeau," Cosimo shouted after his departing figure. "Proshtchajte, gospodin . . . And yours?"

"Je suis le Prince Andrej. . ." and the galloping horse carried off the surname.





} 30 {


I HAVE no idea what this nineteenth century of ours will bring, starting so badly and getting so much worse. The shadow of the Restoration hangs over Europe; all the innovators—whether Jacobins or Bonapartists—defeated; once more absolutism and Jesuitry have the field; the ideals of youth, the lights, the hopes of our eighteenth century—all are dust.

Such thoughts I confide to this notebook, nor would I know how to express them otherwise; I have always been a balanced man, without great impetus or yearnings, a father, a noble by birth, enlightened in ideas, observant of the laws. The excesses of politics have never shocked me much, and I hope never will. And yet within, how sad I feel!

It was different before. My brother was there. I used to say to myself, "That's his business," and get on with my life. For me the sign of change has not been the arrival of the Austro Russians or our annexation to Piedmont or the new taxes or anything of that kind, but just the fact of never seeing him, when I open the window, balancing there up above. Now that he is no longer here I should be interested in so many things: philosophy, politics, history. I follow the news, read books, but they befuddle me. What he meant to say is not there, for he understood something else, something that was all-embracing, and he could not say it in words but only by living as he did. Only by being so frankly himself as he was till his death could he give something to all men.

I remember when he fell ill. We realized it because he brought his sleeping bag on to the great nut tree in the middle of the square. Before, the places where he slept he had always kept hidden, with his wild beast's instinct. Now he felt the need to be always seen by others. It tore at my heart; I had always thought that he would not like to die alone, and perhaps this was a first sign. We sent a doctor up on a ladder; when he came down he made a grimace and raised both arms.

I went up the ladder myself. "Cosimo," I began, "you're past sixty-five now, can you stay up here any longer? What you wanted to say you've said now. We've understood. It's meant a great effort of will on your part, but you've done it, and now you can come down. For those who have spent all their lives on the sea, too, there comes a time for landing."

No use. He made a sign of disagreement with one hand. Now he could scarcely speak. Every now and again he would get up, wrapped in a blanket to the top of his head, and sit on a branch to sun himself a little. More than that he did not move. An old peasant woman, an old mistress of his perhaps, went up and did for him, and brought him hot food. We kept the ladder leaning against the trunk, since there was constant need of going up to help him, and also since some still hoped that he might suddenly take it into his head to come down. (It was others who hoped so; I knew what he was like.) On the square below there was always a circle of people who kept him company, chatting among themselves and sometimes making a remark to him too, though they knew that he no longer wanted to talk.

He got worse. We hoisted a bed onto the tree, and succeeded in fixing it in balance; he got into it quite willingly. We felt a twinge of remorse at not having thought of it before; but In truth he had never rejected comfort; though on trees, he had always tried to live the best he could. So we hurriedly took up other comforts: screens to keep the draught off, a canopy, a brazier. He improved a bit, and we brought him an armchair and lashed it between two branches. He began to spend his days on it, wrapped in his blankets.

One morning, though, we saw him neither in bed nor in the armchair. Alarmed, we raised our eyes. He had climbed onto the top of the tree and was sitting astride a very high branch, wearing only a shirt.

"What are you doing up there?"

No reply. He was half rigid, and seemed to stay up there by a miracle. We got out a big sheet of the kind used to gather olives, and twenty or so of us held it taut beneath, as we were expecting him to fall.

Meanwhile the doctor went up; it was a difficult climb, and two ladders had to be tied together end to end. When he came down he said: "Let the priest go up."

We had already agreed to try a certain Don Pericle, a friend of his, a priest of the Constitutional Church at the time of the French, a Freemason before it was forbidden to the clergy, and readmitted to his offices by the Bishop a short time before, after many ups and downs. He went up with his vestments and ciborium, followed by an acolyte. He spent a short time up there. They seemed to discuss something. Then he came down. "Has he taken the Sacraments then, Don Pericle?"

"No, no, but he says it's all right, for him it's all right." And I never managed to get more out of him.

The men holding the sheet were tired. Cosimo was still up there, motionless. The wind came up, it was westerly, the tip of the tree quivered, we stood ready. At that moment a balloon appeared in the sky.

Some English aeronauts were experimenting with balloon flights along the coast. It was a fine big balloon decorated with fringes and flounces and tassels, with a wickerwork basket attached. Inside it were two officers in gilt epaulettes and peaked caps, gazing through telescopes at the landscape beneath, watching the man on the tree, the outstretched sheet, the crowd, strange aspects of the world. Cosimo had raised his head too and was looking fixedly at the balloon.

And then suddenly the balloon was caught in a gust of westerly wind; it began running before the wind, twisting like a trout and going out to sea. The aeronauts, undaunted, busied themselves reducing—I think—the pressure in the balloon, and at the same time unrolled the anchor to try and grip some support. The anchor flew silvery in the sky attached to a long rope, and following the balloon's course obliquely it began passing right over the square, more or less at the height of the top of the nut tree, so that we were afraid it would hit Cosimo. But little did we guess what we were to see with our own eyes a second later.

The dying Cosimo, at the second when the anchor tope passed near him, gave one of those leaps he so often used to do in his youth, gripped the rope, with his feet on the anchor and his body in a hunch, and so we saw him fly away, taken by the wind, scarce braking the course of the balloon, and vanish out to sea. . ..

The balloon, having crossed the gulf, managed to land on the other side. On the rope was nothing but the anchor. The aeronauts, too busy at the time trying to keep a lookout, had noticed nothing. It was presumed that the dying old man had disappeared while the balloon was flying over the bay.

So vanished Cosimo, without giving us even the satisfaction of seeing him return to earth a corpse. On the family tomb there is a plaque in commemoration of him, with the inscription: "Cosimo Piovasco di Rondò—Lived in trees—Always loved earth—Went into sky."

Every now and again as I write I interrupt myself and go to the window. The sky is empty, and for us old folk of Ombrosa, used to living under those green domes, it hurts the eyes to look out now. Trees seem almost to have no right here since my brother left them or since men have been swept by this frenzy for the ax. And the species have changed too; no longer are there ilexes, elms, oaks; nowadays Africa, Australia, the Americas, the Indies, reach out roots and branches as far as here. What old trees exist are tucked away on the heights; olives on the hills, pines and chestnuts in the mountain woods; the coast down below is a red Australia of eucalyptus, of swollen India rubber trees, huge and isolated garden growths, and the whole of the rest is palms, with their scraggy tufts, inhospitable trees from the desert.

Ombrosa no longer exists. Looking at the empty sky, I ask myself if it ever did really exist. That mesh of leaves and twigs of fork and froth, minute and endless, with the sky glimpsed only in sudden specks and splinters, perhaps it was only there so that my brother could pass through it with his tomtit's tread, was embroidered on nothing, like this thread of ink which I have let run on for page after page, swarming with cancellations, corrections, doodles, blots and gaps, bursting at times into clear big berries, coagulating at others into piles of tiny starry seeds, then twisting away, forking off, surrounding buds of phrases with frameworks of leaves and clouds, then interweaving again, and so running on and on and on until it splutters and bursts into a last senseless cluster of words, ideas, dreams, and so ends.


ADAM, ONE AFTERNOON

The new gardener's boy had long hair kept in place by a piece of cloth tied around his head with a little bow. He was walking along the path with his watering can filled to the brim and his other arm stretched out to balance the load. Slowly, carefully, he watered the nasturtiums as if pouring out coffee and milk, until the earth at the foot of each plant dissolved into a soft black patch; when it was large and moist enough he lifted the watering can and passed on to the next plant. Maria-nunziata was watching him from the kitchen window, and thinking what a nice calm job gardening must be. He was a young man, she noticed, though he still wore shorts and that long hair made him look like a girl. She stopped washing the dishes and tapped on the window.

"Hey, boy," she called.

The gardener's boy raised his head, saw Maria-nunziata, and smiled. She laughed back at him, partly because she had never seen a boy with such long hair and a bow like that on his head. The gardener's boy beckoned to her with one hand, and Maria-nunziata went on laughing at the funny gesture he'd made, and began gesturing back to explain that she had the dishes to



* * *



wash. But the boy beckoned again, and pointed at the pots of dahlias with his other hand. Why was he pointing at those dahlias? Maria-nunziata opened the window and stuck her head out.

"What's up?" she asked, and began laughing again.

"D'you want to see something nice?"

"What's that?"

"Something nice. Come and see. Quickly."

"Tell me what."

"I'll give it to you. I'll give you something very nice."

"But I've got the dishes to wash, and the signora'll come along and not find me."

"Do you want it or don't you? Come on, now."

"Wait a second," said Maria-nunziata, and shut the window.

When she came out through the kitchen door the gardener's boy was still there, watering the nasturtiums.

"Hello," said Maria-nunziata.

Maria-nunziata seemed taller than she was because of her high-heeled shoes, which were awful to work in, but she loved wearing them. Her little face looked like a child's amid its mass of black curls, and her legs were thin and childlike, too, though her body, under the folds of her apron, was already round and ripe. She was always laughing: either at what others or she herself said.

"Hello," said the gardener's boy. The skin on his face, neck, and chest was dark brown, perhaps because he was always half naked, as now.

"What's your name?" asked Maria-nunziata.

"Libereso," said the gardener's boy.

Maria-nunziata laughed and repeated: "Libereso ... Libereso ... what a funny name, Libereso."



* * *



"It's a name in Esperanto," he said. "In Esperanto it means 'liberty.' "

"Esperanto," said Maria-nunziata. "Are you Esperanto?"

"Esperanto's a language," explained Libereso. "My father speaks Esperanto."

"I'm Calabrian," exclaimed Maria-nunziata.

"What's your name?"

"Maria-nunziata," she said and laughed.

"Why are you always laughing?"

"Why are you called Esperanto?"

"Not Esperanto, Libereso."

"Why?"

"Why are you called Maria-nunziata?"

"It is the Madonna's name. I'm named after the Madonna, and my brother after Saint Joseph."

"Senjosef?"

Maria-nunziata burst out laughing: "Senjosef! Saint Joseph, not Senjosef, Libereso!"

"My brother," said Libereso, "is named 'Germinal' and my sister 'Omnia.' "

"That nice thing you mentioned," said Maria-nunziata, "show it to me."

"Come on, then," said Libereso. He put down the watering can and took her by the hand.

Maria-nunziata hesitated. "Tell me what it is first."

"You'll see," he said, "but you must promise me to take care of it."

"Will you give it to me?"

'Yes, I'll give it to you." He had led her to a corner of the garden wall. There the dahlias standing in pots were as tall as the two of them.



* * *



"It's there."

"What is?"

"Wait."

Maria-nunziata peeped over his shoulder. Libereso bent down to move a pot, lifted another by the wall, and pointed to the ground.

"There," he said.

"What is it?" asked Maria-nunziata. She could not see anything; the corner was in shadow, full of wet leaves and garden mold.

"Look, it's moving," said the boy. Then she saw something that looked like a moving stone or leaf, something wet, with eyes and feet; a toad.

"Mammamia!"

Maria-nunziata went skipping away among the dahlias in her high-heeled shoes. Libereso squatted down by the toad and laughed, showing the white teeth in the middle of his brown face.

"Are you frightened? It's only a toad! Why are you frightened?"

"A toad!" gasped Maria-nunziata.

"Of course it's a toad. Come here," said Libereso.

She pointed at it with a trembling finger. "Kill it."

He put out his hands, as if to protect it. "I don't want to. It's so nice."

"A nice toad?"

"All toads are nice. They eat the worms."

"Oh!" said Maria-nunziata, but she did not come any nearer. She was chewing the edge of her apron and trying to watch out of the corners of her eyes.

"Look how pretty it is," said Libereso and put a hand on it.



* * *



Maria-nunziata approached, no longer laughing, and looked on, open-mouthed. "No! No! Don't touch it!"

With one finger Libereso was stroking the toad's gray-green back, which was covered with slimy warts.

"Are you mad? Don't you know they burn when you touch them, and make your hand swell up?"

The boy showed her his big brown hands, the palms covered with a layer of yellow calluses.

"Oh, it won't hurt me," he said. "And it's so pretty."

Now he'd taken the toad by the scruff of the neck like a cat and put it in the palm of his hand. Maria-nunziata, still chewing the edge of her apron, came nearer and crouched down beside him.

"Mammamia!" she exclaimed.

They were both crouching down behind the dahlias, and Maria-nunziata's rosy knees were grazing the brown, scratched ones of Libereso. Libereso cupped his other hand over the back of the toad, and caught it every now and again as it tried to slip out.

"You stroke it, Maria-nunziata," he said.

The girl hid her hands in her apron.

"No," she said firmly.

"What?" he said. "You don't want it?"

Maria-nunziata lowered her eyes, glanced at the toad, and lowered them again quickly.

"No," she said.

"But it's yours. I'm giving it to you."

Maria-nunziata's eyes clouded over. It was sad to refuse a present—no one ever gave her presents—but the toad really did revolt her.

"You can take it home if you like. It'll keep you company."



* * *



"No," she said.

Libereso put the toad back on the ground, and it quickly hopped away and squatted under the leaves.

"Good-bye, Libereso."

"Wait a minute."

"But I must go and finish washing the dishes. The signora doesn't like me to come out in the garden."

"Wait. I want to give you something. Something really nice. Come with me."

She began following him along the gravel paths. What a strange boy this Libereso was, with that long hair, and picking up toads in his hands.

"How old are you, Libereso?"

"Fifteen. And you?"

"Fourteen."

"Now, or on your next birthday?"

"On my next birthday. Assumption Day."

"Has that passed yet?"

"What, don't you know when Assumption Day is?" She began laughing.

"No."

"Assumption Day, when there's the procession. Don't you go to the procession?"

"Me? No."

"Back home there are lovely processions. It's not like here, back home. There are big fields full of bergamots, nothing but bergamote, and everyone picks bergamots from morning till night. I've got fourteen brothers and sisters and they all pick bergamots; five died when they were babies, and then my mother got tetanus, and we were in a train for a week to go to Uncle Carmelo's, and eight of us all slept in a garage there. Tell me, why do you have such long hair?"



* * *



They had stopped.

"Because it grows like that. You've got long hair, too."

"I'm a girl. If you wear long hair, you're like a girl."

"I'm not like a girl. You don't tell a boy from a girl by the hair."

"Not by the hair?"

"No, not by the hair."

"Why not by the hair?"

"Would you like me to give you something nice?"

"Oh, yes."

Libereso began moving among the arum lilies, budding white trumpets silhouetted against the sky. Libereso looked into each, groped around with two fingers, and then hid something in his fist. Maria-nunziata had not gone into the flower bed, and was watching him, with silent laughter. What was he up to now? When Libereso had looked into all the lilies, he came up to her, holding one hand over the other.

"Open your hands," he said. Maria-nunziata cupped her hands but was afraid to put them under his.

"What have you got in there?"

"Something very nice. You'll see."

"Show me first."

Libereso opened his hands and let her look inside. His palm was full of multicolored rose chafers, red and black and even purple ones, but the green were the prettiest. They were buzzing and slithering over one another and waving little black legs in the air. Maria-nunziata hid her hands under her apron.

"Here," said Libereso. "Don't you like them?"

"Yes," said Maria-nunziata uncertainly, still keeping her hands under her apron.

"When you hold them tight they tickle; would you like to feel?"



* * *



Maria-nunziata held out her hands timidly, and Libereso poured a cascade of rose chafers of every color into them.

"Don't be frightened; they won't bite you."

"Mammamia!" It hadn't occurred to her that they might bite her. She opened her hands and the rose chafers spread their wings and the beautiful colors vanished and there was nothing to be seen but a swarm of black insects flying about and settling.

"What a pity. I try to give you a present and you don't want it."

"I must go wash the dishes. The signora will be cross if she can't find me."

"Don't you want a present?"

"What are you going to give me now?"

"Come and see."

He took her hand again and led her through the flower beds.

"I must get back to the kitchen soon, Libereso. There's a chicken to pluck, too."

"Pooh!"

"Why pooh?"

"We don't eat the flesh of dead birds or animals."

"Why, are you always in Lent?"

"What do you mean?"

"Well, what do you eat, then?"

"Oh, all sorts of things, artichokes, lettuce, tomatoes. My father doesn't like us to eat the flesh of dead animals. Or coffee or sugar, either."

"What d'you do with your sugar ration, then?"

"Sell it on the black market."



* * *



They had reached some climbing plants, starred all over with red flowers.

"What lovely flowers," said Maria-nunziata. "D'you ever pick them?"

'What for?"

"To take to the Madonna. Flowers are for the Madonna."

"Mesembryanthemum."

"What's that?"

"This plant's called Mesembryanthemum in Latin. All flowers have Latin names."

"The Mass is in Latin, too."

"I wouldn't know about that."

Libereso was now peering closely between the winding branches on the wall.

"There it is," he said.

"What is?"

It was a lizard, green with black markings, basking in the sun.

"I'll catch it."

"No."

But he inched toward the lizard, very slowly, with both hands open; a jump, and he'd caught it. He laughed happily, showing his white teeth. "Look out, it's escaping!" First a stunned-looking head, then a tail, slithered out between his closed fingers. Maria-nunziata was laughing, too, but every time she saw the lizard she skipped back and pulled her skirt tight about her knees.

"So you really don't want me to give you anything at all?" said Libereso, rather sadly, and very carefully he put the lizard back on the wall; off it shot. Maria-nunziata kept her eyes lowered.



* * *



"Come on," said Libereso, and took her hand again.

"I'd like to have a lipstick and paint my lips red on Sundays to go out dancing. And a black veil to put on my head afterward for Benediction."

"On Sundays," said Libereso, "I go out to the woods with my brother, and we fill two sacks with pine cones. Then, in the evening, my father reads out loud from Kropotkin. My father has hair down to his shoulders and a beard right down to his chest. And he wears shorts in summer and winter. And I do drawings for the Anarchist Federation windows. The figures in top hats are businessmen, those in caps are generals, and those in round hats are priests; then I paint them in water colors."

They came to a pond with round water-lily leaves floating on it.

"Quiet, now," commanded Libereso.

Under the water a frog could be seen swimming up with sharp little strokes of its green legs. It suddenly surfaced, jumped onto a water-lily leaf, and sat down in the middle.

"There," cried Libereso and put out a hand to catch it, but Maria-nunziata let out a cry—"Ugh!"—and the frog jumped back into the water. Libereso began searching for it, his nose almost touching the surface.

"There it is."

He thrust in a hand and pulled it out in his closed fist.

"Two of them together," he cried. "Look. Two of them, on top of each other."

"Why?" asked Maria-nunziata.

"Male and female stuck together," said Libereso. "Look what they're doing." And he tried to put the frogs into Maria-nunziata's hand. Maria-nunziata wasn't sure whether she was



* * *



frightened because they were frogs, or because they were male and female stuck together.

"Leave them alone," she said. "You mustn't touch them."

"Male and female," repeated Libereso. "They're making tadpoles." A cloud passed over the sun. Suddenly Maria-nunziata began to feel anxious.

"It's late. The signora must be looking for me."

But she did not go. Instead they went on wandering around, though the sun did not come out again. And then he found a snake, a tiny little snake, behind a hedge of bamboo. Libereso wound it around his arm and stroked its head.

"Once I used to train snakes. I had a dozen of them; one was long and yellow, a water snake, but it shed its skin and escaped. Look at this one opening its mouth; look how its tongue is forked. Stroke it—it won't bite."

But Maria-nunziata was frightened of snakes, too. Then they went to the rock pool. First he showed her the fountains and opened all the jets, which pleased her very much. Then he showed her the goldfish. It was a lonely old goldfish, and its scales were already whitening. At last: Maria-nunziata liked the goldfish. Libereso began to move his hands around in the water to catch it; it was very difficult, but when he'd caught it Maria-nunziata could put it in a bowl and keep it in the kitchen. He managed to catch it, but didn't take it out of the water in case it suffocated.

"Put your hands down here; stroke it," said Libereso. "You can feel it breathing; it has fins like paper and scales that prickle. Not much, though."

But Maria-nunziata did not want to stroke the fish, either.

In the petunia bed the earth was very soft, and Libereso dug about with his fingers and pulled out some long, soft worms.



* * *



But Maria-nunziata ran away with little shrieks.

"Put your hand here," said Libereso, pointing to the trunk of an old peach tree. Maria-nunziata did not understand why, but she put her hand there; then she screamed and ran to dip it in the pool. For when she had pulled her hand away it was covered with ants. The peach tree was a mass of them, tiny black "Argentine" ants.

"Look," said Libereso and put a hand on the trunk. The ants could be seen crawling over his hand, but he didn't brush them off.

"Why?" asked Maria-nunziata. "Why are you letting yourself get covered with ants?"

His hand was now quite black, and they were crawling up his wrist.

"Take your hand away," moaned Maria-nunziata. "You'll get them all over you."

The ants were crawling up his naked arm, and had already reached his elbow.

Now his whole arm was covered with a veil of moving black dots; they reach his armpit but he did not brush them off.

"Get rid of them, Libereso. Put your arm in water!"

Libereso laughed, while some ants now even crawled from his neck onto his face.

"Libereso! I'll do whatever you like! I'll accept all those presents you gave me."

She threw her arms around his neck and started to brush off the ants.

Smiling his brown-and-white smile, Libereso took his hand away from the tree and began nonchalantly dusting his arm. But he was obviously touched.

"Very well, then, I'll give you a really big present, I've decided. The biggest present I can."



* * *



"What's that?" "A hedgehog." "Mammamia1. The signora! The signora's calling me!"

Maria-nunziata had just finished washing the dishes when she heard a pebble beat against the window. Underneath stood Libereso with a large basket.

"Maria-nunziata, let me in. I want to give you a surprise." "No, you can't come up. What have you got there?" But at that moment the signora rang the bell, and Maria-nunziata vanished.

When she returned to the kitchen, Libereso was no longer to be seen. Neither inside the kitchen nor underneath the window. Maria-nunziata went up to the sink. Then she saw the surprise.

On every plate she had left to dry there was a crouching frog, a snake was coiled up inside a saucepan, there was a soup bowl full of lizards, and slimy snails were making iridescent streaks all over the glasses. In the basin full of water swam the lonely old goldfish.

Maria-nunziata stepped back, but between her feet she saw a great big toad. And behind it were five little toads in a line, taking little hops toward her across the black-and-white-tiled floor.



* * *



THE ENCHANTED GARDEN

Giovannino and Serenella were strolling along the railroad tracks. Below was a scaly sea of somber, clear blue; above, a sky lightly streaked with white clouds. The railroad tracks were shimmering and burning hot. It was fun going along the tracks, there were so many games to play—he balancing on one rail and holding her hand while she walked along on the other, or else both jumping from one sleeper to the next without ever letting their feet touch the stones in between. Giovannino and Serenella had been out looking for crabs, and now they had decided to explore the railroad tracks as far as the tunnel. He liked playing with Serenella, for she did not behave as all the other little girls did, forever getting frightened or bursting into tears at every joke. Whenever Giovannino said, "Let's go there," or "Let's do this," Serenella followed without a word.

Ping! They both gave a start and looked up. A telephone wire had snapped off the top of the pole. It sounded like an iron stork shutting its beak in a hurry. They stood with their noses in the air and watched. What a pity not to have seen it! Now it would never happen again.



* * *



"There's a train coming," said Giovannino.

Serenella did not move from the rail. "Where from?" she asked.

Giovannino looked around in a knowledgeable way. He pointed at the black hole of the tunnel, which showed clear one moment, then misty the next, through the invisible heat haze rising from the stony track.

"From there," he said. It was as though they already heard a snort from the darkness of the tunnel, and saw the train suddenly appear, belching out fire and smoke, the wheels mercilessly eating up the rails as it hurtled toward them.

"Where shall we go, Giovannino?"

There were big gray aloes down by the sea, surrounded by dense, impenetrable nettles, while up the hillside ran a rambling hedge with thick leaves but no flowers. There was still no sign of the train; perhaps it was coasting, with the engine cut off, and would jump out at them all of a sudden. But Giovannino had now found an opening in the hedge. "This way," he called.

The fence under the rambling hedge was an old bent rail. At one point it twisted about on the ground like the corner of a sheet of paper. Giovannino had slipped into the hole and already half vanished.

"Give me a hand, Giovannino."

They found themselves in the corner of a garden, on all fours in a flower bed, with their hair full of dry leaves and moss. Everything was quiet; not a leaf was stirring.

"Come on," said Giovannino, and Serenella nodded in reply.

There were big old flesh-colored eucalyptus trees and winding gravel paths. Giovannino and Serenella tiptoed along the



* * *



paths, taking care not to crunch the gravel. Suppose the owners appeared now?

Everything was so beautiful : sharp bends in the path and high, curling eucalyptus leaves and patches of sky. But there was always the worrying thought that it was not their garden, and that they might be chased away any moment. Yet not a sound could be heard. A flight of chattering sparrows rose from a clump of arbutus at a turn in the path. Then all was silent again. Perhaps it was an abandoned garden?

But the shade of the big trees came to an end, and they found themselves under the open sky facing flower beds filled with neat rows of petunias and convolvulus, and paths and balustrades and rows of box trees. And up at the end of the garden was a large villa with flashing windowpanes and yellow-and-orange curtains.

And it was all quite deserted. The two children crept forward, treading carefully over the gravel : perhaps the windows would suddenly be flung open, and angry ladies and gentlemen appear on the terraces to unleash great dogs down the paths. Now they found a wheelbarrow standing near a ditch. Giovannino picked it up by the handles and began pushing it along: it creaked like a whistle at every turn. Serenella seated herself in it and they moved slowly forward, Giovannino pushing the barrow with her on top, along the flower beds and fountains.

Every now and then Serenella would point to a flower and say in a low voice, "That one," and Giovannino would put the barrow down, pluck it, and give it to her. Soon she had a lovely bouquet.

Eventually the gravel ended and they reached an open space paved in bricks and mortar. In the middle of this space was



* * *



a big empty rectangle: a swimming pool. They crept up to the edge; it was lined with blue tiles and filled to the brim with clear water. How lovely it would be to swim in!

"Shall we go for a dip?" Giovannino asked Serenella. The idea must have been quite dangerous if he asked her instead of just saying, "In we go!" But the water was so clear and blue, and Serenella was never afraid. She jumped off the barrow and put her bunch of flowers in it. They were already in bathing suits, since they'd been out for crabs before. Giovannino plunged in—not from the diving board, because the splash would have made too much noise, but from the edge of the pool. Down and down he went with his eyes wide open, seeing only the blue from the tiles and his pink hands like goldfish; it was not the same as under the sea, full of shapeless green-black shadows. A pink form appeared above him: Serenella! He took her hand and they swam up to the surface, a bit anxiously. No, there was no one watching them at all. But it was not so nice as they'd thought it would be; they always had that uncomfortable feeling that they had no right to any of this, and might be chased out at any moment.

They scrambled out of the water, and there beside the swimming pool they found a Ping-Pong table. Instantly Giovannino picked up the paddle and hit the ball, and Serenella, on the other side, was quick to return his shot. And so they went on playing, though giving only light taps at the ball, in case someone in the villa heard them. Then Giovannino, in trying to parry a shot that had bounced high, sent the ball sailing away through the air and smack against a gong hanging in a pergola. There was a long, somber boom. The two children crouched down behind a clump of ranunculus. At once two menservants in white coats appeared, carrying big



* * *



trays; when they had put the trays down on a round table under an orange-and-yellow-striped umbrella, off they went.

Giovannino and Serenella crept up to the table. There was tea, milk, and sponge cake. They had only to sit down and help themselves. They poured out two cups of tea and cut two slices of cake. But somehow they did not feel at all at ease, and sat perched on the edge of their chairs, their knees shaking. And they could not really enjoy the tea and cake, for nothing seemed to have any taste. Everything in the garden was like that: lovely but impossible to enjoy properly, with that worrying feeling inside that they were only there through an odd stroke of luck, and the fear that they'd soon have to give an account of themselves.

Very quietly they tiptoed up to the villa. Between the slits of a Venetian blind they saw a beautiful shady room, with collections of butterflies hanging on the walls. And in the room was a pale little boy. Lucky boy, he must be the owner of this villa and garden. He was stretched out on a chaise longue, turning the pages of a large book filled with figures. He had big white hands and wore pajamas buttoned up to the neck, though it was summer.

As the two children went on peeping through the slits, the pounding of their hearts gradually subsided. Why, the little rich boy seemed to be sitting there and turning the pages and glancing around with more anxiety and worry than their own. Then he got up and tiptoed around, as if he were afraid that at any moment someone would come and turn him out, as if he felt that that book, that chaise longue, and those butterflies framed on the wall, the garden and games and tea trays, the swimming pool and paths, were only granted to him by some enormous mistake, as if he were incapable of enjoying them and felt the bitterness of the mistake as his own fault.



* * *



The pale boy was wandering about his shady room furtively, touching with his white fingers the edges of the cases studded with butterflies; then he stopped to listen. The pounding of Giovannino and Serenella's hearts, which had died down, now got harder than ever. Perhaps it was the fear of a spell that hung over this villa and garden and over all these lovely, comfortable things, the residue of some injustice committed long ago.

Clouds darkened the sun. Very quietly Giovannino and Serenella crept away. They went back along the same paths they had come, stepping fast but never at a run. And they went through the hedge again on all fours. Between the aloes they found a path leading down to the small, stony beach, with banks of seaweed along the shore. Then they invented a wonderful new game: a seaweed fight. They threw great handfuls of it in each other's faces till late in the afternoon. And Serenella never once cried.



* * *



A GOATHERD AT LUNCHEON

It was, as usual, a mistake of my father's. He had had a boy sent down from a village in the mountains to look after our goats. And the day the boy arrived, my father insisted on asking him to eat with us.

My father does not understand the things that divide people, the difference between a dining room like ours, with its inlaid furniture, dark-patterned carpets, and majolica plates, and those homes of theirs, with smoky stone walls, beaten-earth floors, and newspapers black with flies draped over the mantelpieces. My father always goes about among them with that jolly, ceremonious air of his, and if they invite him to eat when he is out shooting, as they all do, he insists on eating off the same dirty dish; then in the evening they all come to him to settle their disputes. We, his own sons, don't take much part, though. Perhaps my brother, with that air of silent complicity he has, may occasionally be given some rough confidence; but I'm too well aware of the difficulties of communication between human beings, and sense at every minute the gulfs that separate the classes, the abysses that politeness opens up under me.



* * *



When the boy came in, I was reading the paper. My father began fussing over him. What was the point? He'd only get all the more confused. But he didn't. I raised my eyes and there he was in the middle of the room, with his heavy hands and his chin on his chest, though looking straight ahead of him, stubbornly. He was a goatherd boy of about my own age, with compact, wooden-looking hair and high features—forehead, nose, cheeks. He wore a dark military shirt with its top button straining over his Adam's apple, and a crumpled old suit out of which his big knobbly hands and great boots, lifting slowly on the gleaming floor, seemed to overflow.

"This is my son Quinto," said my father. "He's at high school."

I got up and put on a smile; my outstretched hand met his and we immediately moved apart without looking each other in the face. My father had already begun saying things about me that no one could want to hear—how long I still had at school, how I'd once killed a squirrel when we were out shooting in the area the goatherd came from; and I kept on shrugging my shoulders as if to say, "Me? No, really!" The goatherd stood there mute and still, showing no sign of following; every now and again he gave a quick glance toward one of the walls or curtains, like an animal looking for an opening in a cage.

Then my father changed the subject and began walking around the room talking about certain varieties of vegetables grown up in those valleys. He kept asking the boy questions, while the goatherd, with his chin on his chest and his mouth half shut, kept on saying he did not know. Hidden behind the newspaper, I waited for the food to be served. But my father, having made his guest sit down, brought him a cu-



* * *



cumber from the kitchen and began cutting it up in small pieces in his soup plate, for him to eat as an hors d'oeuvre, my father told him.

Now my mother came in, tall, dressed in black with lace trimmings, her smooth white hair rigidly parted. "Ah, here's our little goatherd boy," she said. "Have you had a good trip?" The boy did not get up or reply, but just raised his eyes to my mother in a look full of uncomprehending distrust. I felt wholeheartedly on his side; disapproving of the tone of affectionate superiority my mother was using, I even found myself preferring my father's manner, his rather servile affability, to her aristocratic condescension. And then I hated that possessive tu by which my mother addressed the boy; if she'd been using dialect like my father it might have been all right, but she was talking Italian to the poor goatherd, an Italian cold as a marble wall.

To protect him I tried to turn the conversation away from him, so I read aloud an item of news from the paper, something that could only interest my parents, about a vein of mineral ore discovered in a part of Africa where certain friends of ours lived. I had deliberately chosen an item that could have no conceivable connection with our guest and was full of names unknown to him; I did this not to make his isolation weigh on him more, but so as to dig a moat around him, as it were, give him a breathing space, and distract my parents' besieging attentions for a moment. Perhaps he, too, misinterpreted my move. Anyway, it had the opposite effect. My father went rambling on with a story about Africa, confusing the boy with a tangle of strange names of places, peoples, and animals.

Just as the soup was being served, my grandmother ap-



* * *



peared in her wheel chair, pushed by my poor sister, Cristina. They had to shout loudly in her ear to tell her what was happening. My mother, indeed, made a formal introduction: "This is Giovannino, who is going to look after our goats. My mother. My daughter, Cristina."

I blushed with shame at hearing him called Giovannino, little Giovannino; how different that name must have sounded in the rough dialect of the mountains; certainly it was the first time he heard himself called it in that way.

My grandmother nodded with matriarchal calm: "Fine, Giovannino, let's hope you don't let any goats escape, eh!" My sister, Cristina, who treats all our rare visitors as people of great distinction, now muttered "Delighted" in a terrified way, half hidden behind the back of the wheel chair, and she held her hand out to the youth, who shook it heavily.

The goatherd was sitting on the edge of his chair, but with his shoulders back and his hands spread on the tablecloth, looking at my grandmother as if fascinated. The old woman was sunk in her big armchair, with mittens half covering bloodless fingers that made vague movements in the air, a tiny face under its network of wrinkles, spectacles turned toward him as she tried to make out some shape in the confused mass of shadows and colors transmitted by her eyes, and spoke an Italian that sounded as if she were reading out of a book. It must all have seemed so different to him from the other old women he had met that perhaps he thought he was face to face with a new species of human being.

My poor sister, Cristina, had not moved from her corner. As usual when she saw a new face, she now advanced into the middle of the room, her hands joined under the little shawl drawn over her deformed shoulders, her head streaked with



* * *



premature gray, her face marked with the boredom of her reclusive life. Raising her clear eyes toward the windows, she said, "There's a little boat on the sea, I saw it. And two sailors who kept rowing and rowing. And then it passed behind the roof of a house and no one saw it any more."

I wanted our guest to realize my sister's unfortunate state at once, so that he would take no more notice of her. I jumped up and, with a forced animation that was quite out of place, exclaimed, "But how can you have seen men in a boat from our windows? We're too far away."

My sister went on looking out of the window—not at the sea, but at the sky. "Two men in a boat. Rowing and rowing. And there was a flag, too, the tricolor flag."

Then I realized that as the goatherd listened to my sister he did not seem so uneasy and out of place as he seemed to be with the rest of us. Perhaps he had finally found something that came into his experience, a point of contact between our world and his. And I remembered the idiots who are often to be met in mountain villages, who spend their hours sitting on thresholds amid clouds of flies, and sadden the village nights with their wails. Perhaps this family misfortune of ours, which he understood because it was well known to his own people, brought him closer to us than my father's eccentric jollity, the women's maternal and protective airs, and my own awkward detachment.

My brother arrived late as usual, when we already had spoons in our hands. The instant he came in he took in everything at a glance; before my father had explained and introduced him as "My son Marco, who's studying to be a notary," he had already sat down to eat, without blinking an eyelid, without looking at anyone. His cold spectacles were so im-



* * *



penetrable they seemed black, his depressing little beard stood out spruce and stiff. He gave the impression of having greeted everyone and excused himself for being late, and even perhaps of having smiled at the guest, instead of which he had not opened his mouth or wrinkled his smooth forehead with a single line. Now I knew that the goatherd had a powerful ally on his side, an ally who would protect him and make every retreat possible for him in the atmosphere heavy with awkwardness which only he, Marco, knew how to create.

The goatherd was eating, bent over his bowl of soup, slurping it noisily about in his mouth. Now we three males were with him in leaving obvious manners to the women: my father from natural expansive noisiness, my brother from imperious determination, I from ill grace. I was pleased with this new alliance, this rebellion of us four against the women. Certainly the women disapproved of us all at that moment, and avoided saying so only in order not to humiliate the family in front of the guest, and vice versa. But did the goatherd realize this? Definitely not.

My mother now went into the attack, with a very sweet, "And how old are you, Giovannino?"

The number the boy gave rang out like a shout. He repeated it slowly. "What's that?" said our grandmother and repeated it wrongly. "No, this," and everyone began shouting it in her ear. Only my brother was silent. "A year older than Quinto," my mother now discovered; and this had to be repeated all over again to my grandmother. These were the things I could not bear, which shamed me to the bottom of my heart, for my sake and his; this comparing of him and me, he who had to look after goats to make a living and stank of ram and was strong enough to fell an oak, and I who spent



* * *



my life on a sofa by the radio reading opera librettos, who would soon be going to the university and disliked flannel next to my skin because it made my back prickle. This injustice, these things lacking in me to be him and lacking in him to be me, gave me a sharp feeling of our being, he and I, two incomplete creatures hiding, diffident and ashamed, behind that soup bowl.

It was then that our grandmother asked, "And have you already done your military service?" This question was ridiculous; his class had not yet been called, he had scarcely passed his first check-up. "A soldier of the pope," said my father, one of those jokes of his that no one understood and which he had to repeat twice. "They've made me 'returnable,' " said the goatherd. "Oh," said our grandmother, "refused"; and her voice expressed disapproval and regret. Even if he is, I thought, why make so much of it? "No. 'Returnable.' " "And what does that mean, 'returnable'?" This had to be explained. "Soldier of the pope, ha ha! Soldier of the pope," my father laughed. "Oh, I hope you aren't ill," said my mother. "Ill on the day of the medical," said the goatherd, and luckily my grandmother did not hear.

My brother raised his head from his plate then and through his spectacles gave the guest almost a direct glance, a glance of complicity, while his little beard moved slightly at the corners of his lips in a hint of a smile, as if to say, "Let the others be; I understand you and know all about these things." It was with these unexpected signals of complicity that Marco attracted sympathy; from now on the goatherd would always turn to him and answer every question with a glance in his direction. And yet I guessed that at the root of this apparent shy humanity of my brother, Marco, there lay both the ser-



* * *



vility of our father and the aristocratic superiority of our mother. And I thought that by allying himself with him the goatherd would not be any less alone.

At this point I thought of something to say that might perhaps interest him, and I explained that I had had my military service deferred until the end of my studies. But now I had brought out the tremendous difference between us two: the impossibility of a common link even about things that seemed everyone's fate, like military service.

Just then my sister came out with one of her remarks : "And will you go into the cavalry, sir, excuse me?" This would have passed unobserved if my grandmother had not taken up the subject. "Ah, the cavalry nowadays ..." The goatherd muttered something about "alpini." We realized, my brother and I, that we had at that moment an ally in our mother, who certainly found this subject silly. But why did she not intervene, then, to change the conversation? Luckily my father had stopped repeating, "Ah, a soldier of the pope," and now asked if mushrooms were growing in the woods.

We went on thus for the whole length of the meal, with us three poor boys fighting our war against a cruel, torturing world without being able to recognize one another as allies, full of mutual fears. My brother ended by making a grand gesture, after the fruit: he took out a pack of cigarettes and offered one to our guest. They lit up without asking if they were disturbing anyone; and this was the fullest moment of solidarity created during that meal. I was excluded because my parents had forbidden me to smoke till I left school. My brother was satisfied now; he got up, inhaled once or twice, looking down at us, then turned around and went out as silently as he had come.



* * *



My father lit his pipe and turned on the radio for the news. The goatherd was looking at the instrument, his hands open on his knees and his eyes staring and reddening with tears. Certainly those eyes were still seeing his village high above the fields, the lines of mountains, and the thick chestnut woods. My father did not let us listen to the radio—he was criticizing the United Nations—and I took advantage of this to leave the dining room.

That whole afternoon and evening we were persecuted by the memory of the goatherd. We had supper in silence by the dim light of the chandelier and could not free ourselves of the thought of him alone in the hut on our land. Now he must have finished the soup in the can in which he had heated it up, and was lying on the straw almost in the dark, while down below the goats could be heard moving about and bumping one another and munching grass. The goatherd would go outside and there would be a slight mist over toward the sea and damp air and a little spring gurgling gently in the silence. The goatherd would head for it along paths covered with wild ivy, and drink, though he was not thirsty. Fireflies could be seen appearing and vanishing in what seemed like a great compact swarm. But he would move his arm in the air without touching them.



* * *



THE HOUSE OF THE BEEHIVES

It is difficult to see from far away, and even if someone had already been here once he could not remember the way back; there was a path here at one time, but I made brambles grow over it and wiped out every trace. It's well chosen, this home of mine, lost in this bank of broom, with a single story that can't be seen from the valley, and covered in a chalky whitewash with windows picked out in red.

There's some land around I could have worked and haven't; a patch for vegetables where snails munch the lettuce is enough for me, and a bit of terraced earth to dig up with a pitchfork and grow potatoes, all purple and budding. I only need to work to feed myself, for I've got nothing to share with anyone.

And I don't cut back the brambles, either the ones now clambering over the roof of the house or those already creeping like a slow avalanche over the cultivated ground; I should like them to bury everything, myself included. Lizards have made their nests in the cracks of the walls, ants have scooped out porous cities under the bricks of the floor; I look forward every day to seeing if a new crack has opened, and think of



* * *



the cities of the human race being smothered and swallowed up by weeds.

Above my home are a few strips of rough meadow where I let my goats roam. At dawn, dogs sometimes pass by, on the scent of hares; I chase them off with stones. I hate dogs, with their servile fidelity to man; I hate all domestic animals, their pretense of having sympathy with human beings just so they can lick the remains off greasy plates. Goats are the only animals I can stand, for they don't expect intimacy or give any.

I don't need chained dogs to guard me. Or even hedges or padlocks, those horrible contraptions of humans. My field is studded with beehives, and a flight of bees is like a thorny hedge that only I can cross. At night the bees sleep in the bean husks, but no man ever comes near my house; people are afraid of me and they are right; not because certain tales they tell about me are true—lies, I say, just the sort of thing they would tell—but they are right to be afraid of me, I want them to be.

When I go over the crest in the morning, I can see the valley dropping away beneath and the sea high all around me and the world. And I see the houses of the human race perched on the edge of the sea, shipwrecked in their false neighborliness; I see the tawny, chalky city, the glittering of its windows, and the smoke of its fires. One day brambles and grass will cover its squares, and the sea will come up and mold the ruins into rocks.

Only the bees are with me now; they buzz around my hands without stinging me when I take the honey from the hives, and settle on me like a living beard; friendly bees, ancient race without a history. For years I've been living on this bank of broom with goats and bees; once I used to make a mark on



* * *



the wall at the passing of each year; now the brambles choke everything. Why should I live with men and work for them? I loathe their sweaty hands, their savage rites, their dances and churches, their women's acid saliva. But those stories aren't true, believe me; they've always told stories about me,; the lying swine.

I don't give anything and I don't owe anything; if it rains at night I cook and eat the big snails slithering down the banks in the morning; the earth in the woods is scattered with soft, damp toadstools. The woods give me everything else I need: sticks and pine cones to burn, and chestnuts; and I snare hares and thrushes, too, for don't think I love wild animals or have an idyllic adoration of nature—one of man's absurd hypocrisies. I know that in this world we must devour one another and that the survival of the fittest holds; I kill only the animals I want to eat, with traps, not with guns, so as not to need dogs or other men to fetch them.

Sometimes I meet men in the woods, if I'm not warned in time by the dull thuds of their axes cutting down trees one by one. I pretend not to see them. On Sundays the poor come to gather fuel in the woods, which they strip like the speckled heads of aloes; the trunks are hauled away on ropes and form rough tracks, which gather the rain during storms and provoke landfalls. May everything go to similar ruin in the cities of the human race; may I, as I walk along one day, see chimney tops emerging from the earth, meet parts of streets falling off into ravines, and stumble on strips of railroad track in the middle of the forest.

But you must wonder if I don't ever feel this solitude of mine weighing on me, if some evening, one of those long twilights, I haven't gone down, without any definite idea in



* * *



my head, toward the houses of the human race. I did go, one warm twilight, toward those walls surrounding the gardens below, and climbed down over the medlar trees; but when I heard women laughing and a distant child calling, back I came up here. That was the last time; now I'm up here alone. Well, I get frightened of making a mistake every now and again, as you do. And so, like you, I go on as I was before.

You're afraid of me, of course, and you're right. Not because of that affair, though. That, whether it ever happened or not, was so many years ago it doesn't matter now, anyway.

That woman, that dark woman who came up here to scythe —I had only been up here a short time then and was still full of human emotions—well, I saw her working high on the slope and she hailed me and I didn't reply and passed by. Yes, I was still full of human emotions then, and of an old resentment, too; and because of that old resentment—not against her, I don't even remember her face—I went up behind her without her hearing me.

Now, the tale as people tell it is obviously false, for it was late and there wasn't a soul in the valley and when I put my hands around her throat no one heard her. But I would have to tell you my story from the beginning for you to understand.

Ah, well, let's not mention that evening any more. Here I live, sharing my lettuce with snails that perforate the leaves, and I know all the places where toadstools grow and can tell the good ones from the poisonous; about women and their poisons I don't think any more. Being chaste is nothing but a habit, after all.

She was the last one, that dark woman with the scythe. The sky was full of clouds, I remember, dark clouds scudding along. It must have been under a hurrying sky like that, on



* * *



slopes cropped by goats, that the first human marriage took place. In contact between human beings there can only, I know, be mutual terror and shame. That's what I wanted, to see the terror and shame, just the terror and shame, in her eyes; that's the only reason I did it to her, believe me.

No one has said a word about it to me, ever; there isn't a word they can say, since the valley was deserted that evening. But every night, when the hills are lost in the dark and I can't follow the meaning of an old book by the light of the lantern, and I sense the town with its human beings and its lights and music down below, I feel the voices of you all accusing me.

But there was no one to see me there in the valley; they say those things because the woman never returned home.

And if dogs passing by always stop to sniff at a certain spot, and bay and scratch the ground with their paws, it's because there's an old moles' lair there—I swear it, just an old moles' lair.



* * *



BIG FISH, LITTLE FISH

Zeffirino's father never wore a proper bathing suit. He would put on rolled-up shorts and an undershirt, a white duck cap on his head; and he never moved from the rocky shore. His passion was limpets, the flat mollusks that cling to the rocks until their terribly hard shell virtually becomes part of the rock itself. Zeffirino's father used a knife to prize them loose. Every Sunday, with his bespectacled stare, he passed in review, one by one, all the rocks along the point. He kept on until his little basket was full of limpets; some he ate as he collected them, sucking the moist, hard flesh as if from a spoon; the others he put in a basket. Every now and then he raised his eyes to glance, somewhat bewildered, over the smooth sea, and call, "Zeffirino! Where are you?"

Zeffirino spent whole afternoons in the water. The two of them went out to the point; his father would leave him there, then go off at once after his shellfish. Stubborn and motionless as they were, the limpets held no attraction for Zeffirino; it was the crabs, first and foremost, that interested him, then polyps, medusas, and so on, through all the varieties of fish. In the summer his pursuit became more difficult and ingeni-



* * *



ous; and by now there wasn't a boy his age who could handle a spear gun as well as he could. In the water, those stocky kids, all breath and muscle, are the best; and that's how Zeffirino was growing up. Seen on the shore, holding his father's hand, he looked like one of those kids with cropped hair and gaping mouth who have to be slapped to make them move. In the water, however, he outstripped them all; and, even better, underwater.

That day Zeffirino had managed to assemble a complete kit for underwater fishing. He had had the mask since the previous year, a present from his grandmother; a cousin whose feet were small had lent him her fins; he took the spear gun from his uncle's house without saying anything, but told his father it had been lent him, too. Actually, he was a careful boy, who knew how to use and take care of things, and he could be trusted if he borrowed something.

The sea was beautiful and clear. Zeffirino answered "Yes, Papà" to all the usual warnings, and went into the water. With the glass mask and the snorkel for breathing, with his legs ending like fish, and with that object in his hand—half gun and half spear and a little bit like a pitchfork, too—he no longer resembled a human being. Instead, once in the sea, though he darted off half submerged, you immediately recognized him as himself: from the kick he gave with the fins, from the way the gun jutted out beneath his arm, from his determination as he proceeded, his head at the surface of the water.

The sea bed was pebbles at first, then rocks, some of them bare and eroded, others bearded with thick, dark seaweed. From every cranny of the rocks, or among the tremulous beards swaying in the current, a big fish might suddenly ap-



* * *



pear; from behind the glass of the mask Zeffirino cast his eyes around, eagerly, intently.

A sea bed seems beautiful the first time, when you discover it; but, as with all things, the really beautiful part comes later, when you learn everything, stroke by stroke. You feel as if you were drinking them in, the aquatic trails: you go on and on and never want to stop. The glass of the mask is an enormous, single eye for swallowing colors and shadows. Now the dark ended, and he was beyond that sea of rock. On the sand of the bottom, fine wrinkles could be discerned, traced by the movement of the sea. The sun's rays penetrated all the way down, winking and flashing, and there was the glint of schools of hook-chasers, those tiny fish that swim in a very straight line, then suddenly, all of them together, make a sharp right turn.

A little puff of sand rose and it was the switching tail of a sea bream, there on the bottom. It wasn't even aware that the spear gun was aimed directly at it. Zeffirino was now swimming totally underwater; and the bream, after a few absent flicks of its striped sides, suddenly sped off at mid-depth. Among rocks bristling with sea urchins, the fish and the fisherman swam to an inlet with porous, almost bare rock. He can't get away from me here, Zeffirino thought; and at that moment the bream vanished. From nooks and hollows a stream of little air bubbles rose, then promptly ceased, to resume somewhere else. The sea anemones glowed, expectant. The bream peered from one lair, vanished into another, and promptly popped out from a distant gap. It skirted a spur of rock, headed downward. Zeffirino saw a patch of luminous green toward the bottom; the fish became lost in that light, and he dived after it.



* * *



He passed through a low arch at the foot of the cliff, and found the deep water and the sky above him again. Shadows of pale stone surrounded the bed, and out toward the open sea they descended, a half-submerged breakwater. With a twist of his hips and a thrust of the fins, Zeffirino surfaced to breathe. The snorkel surfaced, he blew out some drops that had infiltrated the mask; but the boy kept his head in the water. He had found the bream again: two bream, in fact! He was already taking aim when he saw a whole squadron of them proceeding calmly to the left, while another school glistened on the right. This was a place rich in fish, like an enclosed pond; and wherever Zeffirino looked he saw a flicker of sharp fins, the glint of scales; his joy and wonder were so great, he forgot to shoot even once.

The thing was not to be in a hurry, to study the best shots, and not to sow panic on all sides. Keeping his head down, Zeffirino moved toward the nearest rock; along its face, in the water, he saw a white hand swaying. The sea was motionless; on the taut and polished surface, concentric circles spread out, as if raindrops were falling. The boy raised his head and looked. Lying prone on the edge of the rock shelf, a fat woman in a bathing suit was taking the sun. And she was crying. Her tears ran down her cheeks one after another and dropped into the sea.

Zeffirino pushed his mask up on his forehead and said, "Excuse me."

The fat woman said, "Make yourself at home, kid." And she went on crying. "Fish as much as you like."

"This place is full of fish," he explained. "Did you see how many there are?"

The fat woman kept her head raised, her eyes staring



* * *



straight ahead, filled with tears. "I didn't see anything. How could I? I can't stop crying."

As long as it was a matter of sea and fish, Zeffirino was the smartest; but in the presence of people, he resumed his gaping, stammering air. "I'm sorry, signora. ..." He would have liked to get back to his bream, but a fat, crying woman was such an unusual sight that he stayed there, spellbound, gaping at her in spite of himself.

"I'm not a signora, kid," the fat woman said with her noble, somewhat nasal voice. "Call me 'signorina.' Signorina De Magistris. And what's your name?"

"Zeffirino."

"Well, fine, Zeffirino. How's the fishing—or the shooting? What do you call it?"

"I don't know what they call it. So far I haven't caught anything. But this is a good place."

"Be careful with that gun, though. I don't mean for my sake, poor me. I mean for you. Take care you don't hurt yourself."

Zeffirino assured her she needn't worry. He sat down on the rock beside her and watched her cry for a while. There were moments when it looked as if she might stop, and she sniffed with her reddened nose, raising and shaking her head. But meanwhile, at the corners of her eyes and under her lids, a bubble of tears seemed to swell until her eyes promptly brimmed over.

Zeffirino didn't know quite what to think. Seeing a lady cry was a thing that made your heart ache. But how could anyone be sad in this enclosure of sea crammed with every variety of fish to fill the heart with desire and joy? And how could you dive into that greenness and pursue fish when



* * *



there was a grown-up person nearby dissolved in tears? At the same moment, in the same place, two yearnings existed, opposed and unreconcilable, but Zeffirino could neither conceive of them both together, nor surrender to the one or to the other.

"Signorina?" he asked.

"Yes?"

"Why are you crying?"

"Because I'm unlucky in love."

"Ah!"

"You can't understand; you're still a kid."

"You want to try swimming with my mask?"

"Thank you very much. Is it nice?"

"It's the nicest thing in the world."

Signorina De Magistris got up and fastened the straps of her suit at the back. Zeffirino gave her the mask and carefully explained how to put it on. She shook her head a little, half joking and half embarrassed, with the mask over her face; but behind it you could see her eyes, which didn't stop crying for a moment. She stepped into the water awkwardly, like a seal, and began paddling, holding her face down.

The gun under his arm, Zeffirino also went in swimming.

"When you see a fish, tell me," he shouted to the signorina. In the water he didn't fool around; and the privilege of coming out fishing with him was one he granted rarely.

But the signorina raised her head and shook it. The glass had clouded over and her features were no longer visible. She took off the mask. "I can't see anything," she said. "My tears make the glass cloud over. I can't. I'm sorry." And she stood there crying in the water.

"This is bad," Zeffirino said. He hadn't brought along a



* * *



half of a potato, which you can rub on the glass to clear it again; but he did the best he could with some spit, then put the mask on himself. "Watch me," he said to the fat lady. And they proceeded together through that sea, he all fins, his head down, she swimming on her side, one arm extended and the other bent, her head bitterly erect and inconsolable.

She was a poor swimmer, Signorina De Magistris, always on her side, making clumsy, stabbing strokes. And beneath her, for yards, the fish raced through the sea, starfish and squid navigated, anemones yawned. Now Zeffirino's gaze saw landscapes approaching that would dazzle anyone. The water was deep, and the sandy bed was dotted with little stones among which skeins of seaweed swayed in the barely perceptible motion of the sea—though, observed from above, the rocks themselves seem to sway on the uniform expanse of sand, in the midst of the still water dense with seaweed.

All of a sudden, the signorina saw him disappear, head down, his behind surfacing for a moment, then the fins; and then his pale shadow was underwater, dropping toward the bottom. It was the moment when the bass realized the danger: the trident spear, already fired, caught him obliquely, and its central prong drove through his tail and transfixed him. The bass raised its prickly fins and lunged, slapping the water; the other prongs of the spear hadn't hooked him, and he still hoped to escape by sacrificing his tail. But all he achieved was to catch a fin on one of the other prongs; and so he was a goner. Zeffirino was already winding in the line, and the boy's pink and happy shadow fell above the fish.

The spear rose from the water with the bass impaled on it, then the boy's arm, then the masked head, with a gurgle of water from the snorkel. And Zeffirino bared his face: "Isn't



* * *



he a beauty? Eh, signorina?" The bass was big, silvery and black. But the woman continued crying.

Zeffirino climbed up on the tip of a rock. With some effort, Signorina De Magistris followed him. To keep the fish fresh, the boy picked a little natural basin, full of water. They crouched down beside it. Zeffirino gazed at the iridescent colors of the bass, stroked its scales, and invited the signorina to do the same.

"You see how beautiful he is? You see how prickly?" When it looked as if a shaft of interest was piercing the fat lady's gloom, he said, "I'll just go off for a moment to see if I can catch another." And, fully equipped, he dived in.

The woman stayed behind with the fish. And she discovered that never had a fish been more unhappy. Now she ran her fingers over its ring-shaped mouth, along its fins, its tail. She saw a thousand tiny holes in its handsome silver body: sea lice, minuscule parasites of fish, had long since taken possession of the bass and were gnawing their way into its flesh.

Unaware of this, Zeffirino was already emerging again with a gilded umbra on the spear; and he held it out to Signorina De Magistris. The two had already divided their tasks: the woman took the fish off the prongs and put it in the pool, and Zeffirino stuck his head back into the water to go catch something else. But each time he first looked to see if the signorina had stopped crying: if the sight of a bass or an umbra wouldn't make her stop, what could possibly console her?

Gilded streaks marked the sides of the umbra. Two fins, parallel, ran down its back. And in the space between these fins, the signorina saw a deep, narrow wound, antedating those of the spear gun. A gull's beak must have pecked the fish's back with such force it was hard to figure out why it hadn't



* * *



killed the fish. She wondered how long the umbra had been swimming around bearing that pain.

Faster than Zeffirino's spear, down toward a school of tiny, hesitant spicara, the sea bream plunged. He barely had time to gulp down one of the little fish before the spear stuck in his throat. Zeffirino had never fired such a good shot.

"A champion fish!" he cried, taking off his mask. "I was following the little ones! He swallowed one, and then I ..." And he described the scene, stammering with emotion. It was impossible to catch a bigger, more beautiful fish; Zeffirino would have liked the signorina finally to share his contentment. She looked at the fat, silvery body, the throat that had just swallowed the little greenish fish, only to be ripped by the teeth of the spear: such was life throughout the sea.

In addition, Zeffirino caught a little gray fish and a red fish, a yellow-striped bream, a plump gilthead, and a flat bogue; even a mustached, spiky gurnard. But in all of them, besides the wounds of the spear, Signorina De Magistris discovered the bites of the lice that had gnawed them, or the stain of some unknown affliction, or a hook stuck for ages in the throat. This inlet the boy had discovered, where all sorts of fish gathered, was perhaps a refuge for animals sentenced to a long agony, a marine lazaretto, an arena of desperate duels.

Now Zeffirino was venturing along the rocks: octopus! He had come upon a colony squatting at the foot of a boulder. On the spear one big purplish octopus now emerged, a liquid like watered ink dripping from its wounds; and a strange uneasiness overcame Signorina De Magistris. To keep the octopus they found a more secluded basin, and Zeffirino wanted never to leave it, to stay and admire the gray-pink skin that slowly changed hues. It was late, too, and the boy was beginning to



* * *



get a bit of gooseflesh, his swim had lasted so long. But Zeffirino was hardly one to renounce a whole family of octopus, now discovered.

The signorina observed the octopus, its slimy flesh, the mouths of the suckers, the reddish and almost liquid eye. Alone among the whole catch, the polyp seemed to be without blemish or torment. The tentacles of an almost human pink, so limp and sinuous and full of secret armpits, prompted thoughts of health and life, and some lazy contractions caused them to twist still, with a slight opening of the suckers. In mid-air, the hand of Signorina De Magistris sketched a caress over the coils of the octopus; her fingers moved to imitate its contraction, closer and closer, and finally touched the coils lightly.

Evening was falling; a wave began to slap the sea. The tentacles vibrated in the air like whips, and suddenly, with all its strength, the octopus was clinging to the arm of Signorina De Magistris. Standing on the rock, as if fleeing from her own imprisoned arm, she let out a cry that sounded like: It's the octopus! The octopus is torturing me!

Zeffirino, who at that very moment had managed to flush a squid, stuck his head out of the water and saw the fat woman with the octopus, which stretched out one tentacle from her arm to catch her by the throat. He also heard the end of the scream: it was a high, constant scream, but—so it seemed to the boy—without tears.

A man armed with a knife rushed up and started aiming blows at the octopus's eye. He decapitated it almost with one stroke. This was Zeffirino's father, who had filled his basket with limpets and was searching along the rocks for his son. Hearing the cry, narrowing his bespectacled gaze, he had seen



* * *



the woman and run to help her, with the blade he used for his limpets. The tentacles immediately relaxed; Signorina De Magistris fainted.

When she came to, she found the octopus cut into pieces, and Zeffirino and his father made her a present of it, so she could fry it. It was evening, and Zeffirino put on his shirt. His father, with precise gestures, explained to her the secret of a good octopus fry. Zeffirino looked at her and several times thought she was about to start up again; but no, not a single tear came from her.



* * *



A SHIP LOADED WITH CRABS

The boys from Piazza dei Dolori had their first swim of the summer on an April Sunday, when the blue sky was brand new and the sun was young, carefree. They went running down the steep narrow alleys, waving their patched jersey trunks, some already in clogs clattering over the paving stones, most of them without socks, to spare themselves the nuisance, afterward, of putting them back on wet feet. They ran to the pier, jumping over the nets spread out on the ground and lifted by the callused feet of the fishermen, squatting to mend them. Along the rocks of the breakwater, the kids stripped, excited by that sharp smell of old, rotting seaweed and by the flight of the gulls trying to fill the sky, which was too big. Hiding clothes and shoes in the hollows of the rocks, and setting the baby crabs to flight, they began to jump from rock to rock, barefoot and half naked, waiting for one of their number to make up his mind and dive in first.

The water was calm but not clear, a dense blue with harsh green glints. Gian Maria, known as Mariassa, climbed to the top of a high rock and blew his nose against his thumb, a boxer's gesture he had.



* * *



"Come on," he said. He pressed his hands together, held them out in front of himself, and plunged headlong. He surfaced a few yards farther out, spouting water, then playing dead.

"Cold?" they asked him.

"Boiling," he yelled and started making furious strokes to keep from freezing.

"Hey, gang! Follow me!" said Cicin, who considered himself the chief, though nobody ever paid any attention to him.

They all dived in : Pier Lingera made a somersault, Bombolo took a belly-whopper, then Paulo, Carruba, and, last of all, Menin, who was scared to death of the water and jumped in feet first, pinching his nose with his fingers.

Once in the water, Pier Lingera, who was the strongest, ducked the others one by one; then they all ganged up and ducked Pier Lingera.

Gian Maria alias Mariassa suggested, "The ship! Let's go on the ship!"

A vessel still lay in the harbor, sunk by the Germans during the war to block access. Actually, there were two ships, one above the other; the visible one rested on a second, completely submerged.

"Yeah, let's!" the others said.

"Can we climb up on it?" Menin asked. "It's mined."

"Balls. Mined!" Carruba said. "The Arenella guys climb on it whenever they like, and play war."

They started swimming toward the ship.

"Gang! Follow me!" said Cicin, who wanted to be the leader. But the others swam faster and left him behind, except for Menin, who swam frog-style and was always the last.

They reached the ship, whose flanks rose from the water,



* * *



black with old tar, bare, and moldy, the stripped superstructures profiled against the fresh blue sky. A beard of stinking seaweed rose to cover the ship from the keel; the old paint was peeling in great flakes. The boys swam all around it, then paused a while below the poop, to look at the almost erased name: Abukir, Egypt. The anchor chain, stretched obliquely, swayed now and then with the jabs of the tide, its enormous rusted links creaking.

"Let's stay here," Bombolo said.

"Come on," Pier Lingera said, already gripping the chain with his hands and feet. He scrambled up like a monkey, and the others followed him.

Halfway up, Bombolo slipped and hit the water with his belly; Menin couldn't make it, so two of the others had to pull him up.

On board, they began wandering around that dismantled ship in silence, looking for the wheel of the helm, the siren, the hatches, the lifeboats, all the things there were supposed to be on a ship. But this ship was as barren as a raft, covered only with whitish gull dung. There were five of them, five gulls, perched on a railing; when they heard the barefoot steps of the band, they took flight, one after the other, in a great flapping of wings.

"Hey!" Paulo cried, and threw after the last gull a rivet he had picked up.

"Gang! Let's go to the engine room!" Cicin said. It would surely be more fun to play among the machines or in the hold.

"Can we go down to the other ship, underneath?" Carruba asked. That would have been great: to be down there, all sealed off, with the sea around them and over them, like being in a submarine.



* * *



"The one underneath is mined!" Menin said.

"You're mined!" they said to him.

They started down a companionway. After a few steps, they hesitated: at their feet the black water began, rustling in the enclosed space. Standing still and mute, the boys from Piazza dei Dolori looked at it; in the depths of that water there was the black glint of colonies of sea urchins, slowly unfolding their spines. And the walls on every side were encrusted with limpets, their shells dripping green algae; the iron of the walls seemed eroded. And there were crabs teeming at the edges of the water, thousands of crabs of every shape and every age, which scuttled on their curved, spoked legs, and opened their claws, and thrust forward their sightless eyes. The sea slapped dully in the space of the iron walls, licking those flat crab bellies. Perhaps the entire hold of the ship was full of groping crabs, and one day the ship would move on the crabs' legs and walk through the sea.

The boys came up on deck again, at the prow. Then they saw the little girl. They hadn't seen her before, though it was as if she had always been there. She was a little girl of about six, fat, with long curly hair. She was all sunburned, wearing only little white pants. There was no telling where she had come from. She didn't even look at them, totally concerned with a medusa that was lying on its back on the wooden deck, the flabby festoons of its tentacles spread out. With a stick the little girl was trying to turn it upright.

The Piazza dei Dolori boys stopped all around her, gaping. Mariassa was the first to step forward. He sniffed.

"Who're you?" he said.

The girl raised the pale-blue eyes in her dark, plump face; then she resumed working the stick as a lever under the medusa.



* * *



"She must be one of the Arenella gang," Carruba said; he knew them.

The Arenella boys let some girls come with them to swim or play ball, and even to make war with reed weapons.

"You," Mariassa said, "are our prisoner."

"Gang!" Cicin said. "Take her alive!"

The little girl went on poking at the jellyfish.

"Battle stations!" Paulo yelled, as he happened to look around. "The Arenella gang!"

While they had been involved with the girl, the Arenella boys, who spent their whole day in the sea, had come swimming underwater and silently climbed the anchor chain; now they appeared over the railings. They were short, stocky kids, light as cats, with shaved heads and dark skin. Their trunks weren't black and long and floppy like those of the Dolori boys, but consisted of a single length of white canvas.

The battle began; the Piazza dei Dolori boys were thin, all nerves, except for Bombolo, who was a fatty; but they had a fanatical fury when they swung their fists, hardened by endless brawls in the little streets of the old city against the gangs from San Siro and the Giardinetti. At first the Arenella kids had the advantage, because of the surprise element; but then the Dolori gang perched on the ladders and there was no dislodging them. They wanted to avoid, at all cost, being forced to the railing, where it would be easy to dump them into the drink. Finally Pier Lingera, who was the strongest of the bunch and also the oldest and who hung out with them only because he had been kept back in school, managed to force one of the Arenella boys to the edge and push him into the sea.

Then the Dolori gang took the offensive, and the Arenella kids, who felt more at home in the water and, being sensible,



* * *



had no notions about honor in their heads, one by one eluded their enemies and dived in.

"Come and get us in the water. We dare you!" they yelled.

"Gang! Follow me!" yelled Cicin, who was about to dive.

"Are you crazy?" Mariassa held him back. "In the water they'd win hands down!" And he started shouting insults at the fugitives.

The Arenella boys began to splash water up from below; they splashed so hard there wasn't a place on the ship that wasn't wet. Finally they got tired of that and swam out to sea, heads down and arms arched, surfacing every now and then to breathe, in little spurts.

The Piazza dei Dolori boys had remained masters of the field. They went to the prow; the little girl was still there. She had succeeded in turning over the medusa and was now trying to lift it on the stick.

"They left us a hostage!" Mariassa said.

"Hey, gang! A hostage!" Cicin was all excited.

"You cowards!" Carruba shouted behind the other bunch. "Leaving your women in the enemies' hands!"

They had a highly developed sense of honor around Piazza dei Dolori.

"Come with us," Mariassa said, and started to put a hand on her shoulder.

The girl motioned him to keep still; she had almost succeeded in lifting the medusa. As Mariassa bent over to look, the girl pulled up the stick, with the medusa balanced on it, pulled it up, up, and slammed it into Mariassa's face.

"Bitch!" Mariassa yelled, spitting and putting his hands to his face.

The little girl looked at them all and laughed. Then she



* * *



turned, went straight to the top of the prow, raised her arms, joining her fingertips, did a swan dive, and swam off without looking back. The Piazza dei Dolori boys hadn't moved.

"Say," Mariassa asked, touching one cheek, "is it true that medusas make your skin burn?"

"Wait and find out," Pier Lingera said. "But the best thing would be to dive in right away."

"Let's go," Mariassa said, starting off with the others.

Then he stopped. "From now on we have to have a woman in our gang, too! Menin! Bring your sister!"

"My sister's a dummy," Menin said.

"That doesn't matter," Mariassa said. "Come on!" And he gave Menin a shove, pushing him into the water because he didn't know how to dive. Then they all dived in.



* * *



MAN IN THE WASTELAND

Early in the morning you can see Corsica : it looks like a ship laden with mountains, suspended out there on the horizon. If we lived in another country it would have inspired legends, but not here: Corsica is a poor land, poorer than ours; nobody has ever gone there and nobody has ever given it any thought. If you see Corsica in the morning it means the air is clear and still and there's no rain in the offing.

On one of those mornings, at dawn, my father and I were climbing up the dry, stony gullies of Colla Bella, with the dog on a chain. My father had encased his chest and back in scarves, coats, a hunting jacket, vests, knapsacks, canteens, cartridge belts; from all this, a white goatee emerged; on his legs he wore an old pair of scratched-up, leather puttees. I had on a threadbare, too-tight jerkin that left my wrists and waist exposed, and trousers, also tight and threadbare; and I took long strides like my father, but with my hands dug into my pockets and my long neck pulled down between my shoulders. Both of us carried old hunting guns, a fine make but neglected and streaked with rust. The dog was a harrier, ears drooping till they swept the ground, a short bristling coat



* * *



on its bones that seemed to scrape the skin. Behind him he dragged a chain that might have served for a bear.

"You stay here with the dog," my father said. "From here you can keep an eye on both trails. I'll go to the other, and when I get there I'll give you a whistle. Then you turn the dog loose. Watch out: a hare can slip past in a second."

My father continued up the stony track, and I crouched down on the ground with the dog, whimpering because he wanted to follow. Colla Bella is a height rising from the pale shore, all barren terrain, weeds hard to crop, crumbling walls of ancient embankments. Farther down, the black haze of the olive groves begins; farther up, the tawny woods, made patchy by fires, like the backs of mangy old dogs. Everything lazed in the gray of the dawn as in a half-opening of still-sleepy eyelids. At sea no outlines could be distinguished; the water was striped by shafts of mist for all its breadth.

My father's whistle came. Released from the chain, the dog set off in great zigzags up the stony bed, snapping the air with yelps. Then, silent, it began to sniff the ground and ran off, still sniffing diligently, its tail erect, a rhomboid white spot under it that seemed illuminated.

I kept the gun aimed, resting on my knees, and my eyes aimed, resting on the intersection of the trails, because a hare can slip past in a second. Dawn was revealing colors, one by one. First the red of the wild arum berries, the reddish slashes on the pine trees. Then green, the hundred, the thousand greens of the fields, bushes, woods, which a short time before had been uniform : now, instead, a new green appeared every moment, distinct from the others. Then the blue: the loud blue of the sea which deafened everything and made the sky turn wan and timid. Corsica vanished, engulfed by the light,



* * *



but the border between sea and sky did not become firm: it remained that ambiguous, confused zone frightening to look at because it does not exist.

All of a sudden houses, roofs, streets were born at the foot of the hills, along the sea. Every morning the city was born like this from the realm of shadows, all at once, tawny with tiles, sparkling with glass, lime-white with stucco. The light every morning described it in the smallest details, narrowed its every doorway, enumerated all its houses. Then the light moved up along the hills, revealing more and more particulars : new terraces, new houses. It arrived at Colla Bella, yellow and barren and deserted; and it discovered a house up there as well, isolated, the highest house before the woods, within range of my gun, the house of Baciccin the Blissful.

In shadow, the house of Baciccin the Blissful seemed a heap of stones; around it there was a dirt terrace, caked, gray, like the surface of the moon, from which rose scrawny plants, as if he cultivated poles. There were some wires stretched, for laundry, it seemed; but they were his vineyard of consumptive, skeletal vines. Only a slender fig tree seemed to have the strength to support its leaves, writhing under the weight, at the edge of the terrace.

Baciccin came out; he was so thin that, to be seen, he had to stand in profile; otherwise all you saw was his mustache, gray and bristling. He was wearing a woolen Balaclava helmet and a homespun suit. He saw me waiting and came over.

"Hare, hare," he said.

"Hare. As usual," I answered.

"Shot at one this big last week on that track. Close as here to there. Missed."

"Bad luck."



* * *



"Bad luck, bad luck. I'm not one for hare anyway. I'd rather stand under a pine tree and wait for thrush. In one morning you can get five or six shots."

"So you shoot your dinner, Baciccin."

"That's right. But then I miss them all."

"It happens. It's the cartridges."

"The cartridges, the cartridges."

"The ones they sell are no good. Make your own."

"That's right. I do make my own. Maybe I make them wrong."

"Ah, you have to have the knack."

"That's right, that's right."

Meanwhile he had assumed a position, his arms folded, in the center of the crossing and was not going to move. The hare would never go by if he stood in the way like that. I'll tell him to move, I thought; but I didn't tell him, and I sat there waiting all the same.

"No rain, no rain," Baciccin said.

"Corsica: did you see it this morning?"

"Corsica. All dry, Corsica."

"A bad year, Baciccin."

"Bad year. Planted beans. Did they grow?"

"Did they grow?"

"Did they grow? No."

"They sold you bad seed, Baciccin."

"Bad seed, bad year. Eight artichoke plants."

"Damn."

"Tell me what I got from them."

"You tell."

"All died."

"Damn."



* * *



Costanzina, the daughter of Baciccin the Blissful, came from the house. She could have been sixteen: olive-shaped face, eyes, mouth, nostrils, shaped like an olive; and braids down her back. She must have had olive-shaped breasts, too: all the same style; like a statuette, wild as a she-goat, wool socks up to her knees.

"Costanzina," I called.

"Oh!"

But she did not come closer; she was afraid of frightening the hares.

"Hasn't barked yet, hasn't flushed it," Baciccin said.

We pricked up our ears.

"He hasn't barked. No use going away yet," and he went off.

Costanzina sat down beside me. Baciccin the Blissful had started wandering around his bleak terrace, pruning the scraggy vines; every now and then he would stop and come back to talk.

"What's new around Colla Bella, Tancina?" I asked.

The girl began to recount, dutifully: "Last night I saw the hares over there, jumping in the moonlight. They went 'hee! hee!' Yesterday a mushroom sprouted behind the oak. Poisonous, red with white spots. I killed it with a stone. A big, yellow snake came down the path at noon. She lives in that bush. Don't throw stones at her; she's harmless."

"Do you like living on Colla Bella, Tancina?"

"Not in the evening. The mist comes up at four o'clock, and the city disappears. Then, at night, you can hear the owl cry."

"Scared of owls?"

"No. Scared of bombs, planes."

Baciccin came over. "The war? How's the war going?"

"The war's been over a good while, Baciccin."



* * *



"Fine. What's taken the war's place, then? Anyway, I don't believe it's over. Whenever they used to say that, it would start up again—every time, in some different way. Am I right?"

"Yes, you're right. ... Which do you like best, Tancina: Colla Bella or the city?" I asked.

"In the city there's the shooting gallery," she answered, "trams, people shoving, movies, ice cream, the beach with umbrellas on it."

"This girl," Baciccin said, "isn't all that crazy about going to the city; the other one liked it so much she never came back."

"Where is she now?"

"Hmph."

"Hmph. We need rain."

"That's the truth. Need rain. Corsica, this morning. Am I right?"

"You're right, yes."

In the distance there was an explosion of yelps.

"Dog's flushed a hare," I said.

Baciccin came and stood in the trail, his arms folded.

"He's hunting. A good hunter," he said. "I had a dog, a bitch name of Cililla. She'd trail a hare for three days. Once she flushed him at the top of the wood and chased him two yards in front of my gun. I fired twice. Missed."

"You can't get a hit every time."

"Can't. Well, she went on after that hare for two hours. ..."

They heard two shots, but then the yelping began again, coming closer.

"... two hours later," Baciccin resumed, "she brought the hare back to me, like before. I missed it again, goddamnit."

All of a sudden a hare appeared, darting along the trail. It



* * *



came almost to Baciccin's legs, then swerved into the bushes and disappeared. I hadn't even had time to take aim.

"Damnation!" I yelled.

"What's wrong?" Baciccin asked.

"Nothing," I said.

Costanzina hadn't seen it, either; she had gone back into the house.

"Well," Baciccin went on, "you know that bitch kept chasing that hare and bringing it back to me over and over until I hit it? What a dog!"

"Where is she now?"

"Ran off."

"Well, you can't win every time."

My father came back with the panting dog. He was cursing.

"Missed by a fraction of an inch. This close. A big one. Did you see him?"

"Not a thing," Baciccin said.

I slung the gun over my shoulder and we started on our way down.



* * *



LAZY SONS

At dawn my brother and I are asleep, faces buried in the pillows, and already our father's hobnail tread can be heard as he moves around the rooms. When he gets up, our father makes a lot of noise, deliberately perhaps; and he sees to it that he has to go up and down the steps, in his cleated boots, at least twenty times, never for any reason. Maybe this is his whole life, a waste of energy, a great useless exertion; and maybe he does it as a protest against the two of us—we get him so angry.

My mother doesn't make any noise, but she is already up, too, in the big kitchen, poking the fire, peeling things with those hands that become blacker and more scarred all the time, polishing glasses and furniture, jabbing at the laundry. This, too, is a protest against us, her doing housework always in silence and managing it all without any maids.

"Sell the house, and we'll spend the money," I say with a shrug when they start pestering me about how things can't go on like this. But my mother continues toiling silently, day and night, till there's no telling when she sleeps; and meanwhile the cracks in the ceilings widen and lines of ants trace



* * *



the walls, and weeds and brambles keep growing higher in the rank garden. Soon nothing will be left of our house but a ruin covered with vines. In the morning, however, mother doesn't come and tell me to get up because she knows it's no use anyway, and that silent attention to the house crumbling around her is her way of persecuting us.

My father, on the contrary, is already flinging open our window at six o'clock, in hunting jacket and puttees, and yelling at us: "I'm going to take a stick to you two! Bums! Everybody works in this house but the pair of you! Pietro! get up if you don't want me to hang you! And make that gallows bird of a brother, Andrea, get up, too!"

In our sleep, we have already heard him approaching; digging our heads into the pillows, we don't even roll over. We protest now and then with grunts when he doesn't let up. But he soon goes away; he knows it's all useless, this is all a play he puts on, a ritual ceremony, a refusal to admit defeat.

We grope our way back into sleep : most times, my brother hasn't even waked up, he's become so used to this and he doesn't give a damn. Egotistic and insensitive, that's my brother: sometimes he makes me mad. I act the same way he does, but at least I understand that it's not right, and I'm the first to be discontent. Still I keep on, though with anger.

"Dog," I say to my brother Andrea, "you dog, you're killing your father and mother." He doesn't answer: he knows I'm a hypocrite and a clown, and nobody's a bigger do-nothing than me.

Ten, maybe twenty minutes later, my father's at the door again, in a stew. Now he uses a different method: kindly, almost indifferent invitations, a pathetic farce. He says : "Well, who's coming to San Cosimo with me? The vines have to be tied."



* * *



San Cosimo is our farm. Everything is drying up and there's no manpower or money to keep it running.

"The potatoes have to be dug. Are you coming, Andrea? Well? Are you coming? I'm speaking to you, Andrea. We have to water the beans. Are you coming?"

Andrea raises his mouth from the pillow. "No," he says, and goes back to sleep.

"Why not?" My father continues his farce. "It was all settled. Pietro? Are you coming, Pietro?"

Then he explodes again and calms down again and talks about the things to be done at San Cosimo, as if it were understood that we're going. That dog, I think of my brother, that dog, he could get up and give the poor old man some satisfaction, at least this once. But I myself feel no urge to get up. and I make an effort to be immersed again in my sleep, by now disturbed.

"Well, hurry up. I'll wait for you," our father says and goes off as if we were now in agreement. We hear him pacing and fuming downstairs, preparing the fertilizer, the sulphate, the seeds to be taken up there; every day he sets out and comes back laden like a mule.

We are thinking he's already gone when he yells again, from the foot of the stairs: "Pietro! Andrea! For God's sake, aren't you ready yet?"

This is his final outburst; then we hear his hobnailed footsteps behind the house, the gate slams, and he goes off along the path, hawking and spitting.

Now we could have a good long sleep, but I can't manage to doze off; I think of my father, burdened, climbing up the track spitting, and afterward at work, in a rage with the tenants who steal from him and let everything go to rack and ruin. And he looks at the plants and the fields, where the insects



* * *



gnaw and burrow all over, and at the yellowing leaves and the thick weeds, all the work of his life that is falling to pieces like the sustaining walls of the terrace that crumble more with every rain; and he curses his sons.

Dog, I say, thinking of my brother, you dog. Then I prick up my ears and from below I can hear something clatter to the floor, a falling broomstick. My mother is alone in that enormous kitchen, and daylight is just brightening the windowpanes, and she is slaving for people who turn their backs on her. As I am thinking this, I fall asleep.

It's not yet ten o'clock when Mother starts yelling from the stairs, "Pietro! Andrea! It's ten already!" She sounds very angry, as if she were irritated by something extraordinary; but it's the same every morning. "Awright ..." we yell back. And, awake by now, we stay in bed another half-hour, to become used to the idea of getting up.

Then I start saying, "Come on, Andrea, wake up. Let's get up, all right? Andrea, come on, start getting out of bed." Andrea grunts.

Finally, with a lot of huffing and stretching, we're on our feet. Andrea walks around in his pajamas with an old man's movements, his hair all disheveled and his eyes half blind, and he's already licking a paper to roll a smoke. He smokes at the window, then begins to wash and shave.

Meanwhile he has started grumbling, and little by little the grumbling gives way to singing. My brother has a baritone voice, and though in company he is always mournful and never sings, when he's alone, shaving or taking a bath, he strikes up one of those cadenced tunes of his in a grim voice. He doesn't know any songs, so he always comes forth with a Carducci poem he learned as a child: "On Verona's castle strikes the noonday sun. ..."



* * *



I'm getting dressed on the other side of the room, and I act as chorus, joylessly, but with a kind of violence: "And the green Adige flows murmuring into the open country. ..."

My brother continues his chant to the end, not overlooking a single stanza, as he washes his head and brushes his shoes. "Black as an old raven, and with eyes of coal. ..."

The more he sings, the more I'm filled with anger, and I also start singing fiercely: "Ill-luck is mine, and an evil beast has bitten me. ..."

This is the only time we make noise. Afterward we're quiet for the whole day.

We go downstairs and warm up some milk, then dip bread into it and eat noisily. Mother hovers over us and talks, complaining, but without insistence, about all the things that have to be done, the chores that could be performed. "Yes, yes," we answer, forgetting immediately.

As a rule I don't go out in the morning. I stay home, dawdling in the halls with my hands in my pockets, or I arrange my library. I haven't bought any new books for some time: it would take money; besides, I've lost interest in too many things, and if I started reading again I'd want to read everything, and I don't feel up to it. But I keep arranging the few books I have on the shelf: Italian, French, English; or else by subject—history, philosophy, fiction—or else I put all the bound volumes together, with the fine editions and the shabby books elsewhere.

My brother, on the contrary, goes to the Caffè Imperia and watches the billiards game. He himself doesn't play, because he doesn't know how: he stays there for hours and hours, looking at the players, following the balls in fancy triple shots, smoking, never getting excited, never betting since he has no money. Sometimes they let him keep score, but often his mind wanders



* * *



and he makes mistakes. He transacts a little deal or two, enough to pay for his smokes. Six months ago he filed an application with the Aqueduct Administration for a job that would support him, but he hasn't followed it up; for the present he gets enough to eat, anyway.

At dinner my brother arrives late, and both of us eat in silence. My parents are always arguing about expenses and income and debts and about how to manage with two sons who aren't earning anything; and our father says, "Look at your friend Costanzo, look at your friend Augusto." Our friends aren't like us: they've formed a partnership, buying and selling the timber rights to some woods, and they're always out and about on business, dealing and bargaining, sometimes with our father, too; they earn piles of money and soon will own their own truck. They're crooks and our father knows it; still, he would like us to be like them rather than the way we are. "Your friend Costanzo earned such-and-such an amount on that deal," he says. "See if you can go in with them, too." But our friends hang around with us in their free time, and they never suggest deals to us; they know we're lazy and good-for-nothing.

In the afternoon, my brother goes back to sleep: there's no figuring out how he manages to sleep so much, but he does. I go to the movies : I go every day; if they're showing a film I've already seen, then I don't have to make any effort to follow the story.

After supper, stretched out on the sofa, I read some long, translated novels people lend me; often, as I read, I lose the thread of the plot and can never make heads or tails of it. My brother gets up as soon as he's eaten and leaves, to watch the billiards game.



* * *



My parents go straight to bed because they get up early in the morning: "Go to your room; you're wasting electricity here," they say to me as they climb the stairs. "I'm going," I say and remain lying there.

I'm already in bed and have been sleeping for a while when my brother comes back, around two. He turns on the light, stirs around the room, and has a last smoke. He tells me what's going on in the city, expresses kindly opinions of people. This is the hour when he is really awake and glad to talk. He opens the window to let the smoke out; we look at the hill with the lighted road and the dark, clear sky. I sit up in bed and, carefree, we chat for a long time about trivial things, until we're sleepy again.



* * *



WARTIME STORIES



* * *



FEAR ON THE FOOTPATH

At a quarter past nine, just as the moon was rising, he reached the Colla Bracca meadow; at ten he was already at the juncture of the two trees; by half past twelve he'd be at the fountain; he might reach Vendetta's camp by one—ten hours of walking at a normal speed, but six hours at the most for Binda, the courier of the first battalion, the fastest courier in the partisan brigade.

He went hard at it, did Binda, flinging himself headlong down short cuts, never making a mistake at crossroads that all looked alike, recognizing stones and bushes in the dark. His firm chest kept the same rhythm of breathing; his legs went like pistons. "Hurry up, Binda!" his comrades would say as they saw him from a distance climbing up toward their camp. They tried to read in his face whether the news and orders he was bringing were good or bad; but Binda's face was shut like a fist, a narrow mountaineer's face with hairy lips on a short bony body more like a boy's than a youth's, with muscles like stones.

His was a tough and solitary job, being woken at all hours, sent out even to Serpe's camp or Pelle's, having to march in the dark valleys at night, accompanied only by a French



* * *



tommy gun, light as a little wooden rifle, hanging on his shoulder; and when he reached a detachment he had to move on to another or return with the answer; he would wake up the cook and grope around in the cold pots, then leave again with a panful of chestnuts still sticking in his gullet. But it was the natural job for him, because he never got lost in the woods and knew all the paths, from having led goats about them or gone there for wood or hay since he was a child; and he never went lame or rubbed the skin off his feet scrambling about the rocks, as so many partisans did who'd come up from the towns or the navy.

Glimpses caught as he went along—a chestnut tree with a hollow trunk, blue lichen on a stone, the bare space around a charcoal pit—linked themselves in his mind to his remotest memories—an escaped goat, a polecat driven from its lair, the raised skirt of a girl. And now the war in these parts was like a continuation of his normal life; work, play, hunting, all turned into war : the smell of gunpowder at the Loreto bridge, escapes down the bushy slopes, minefields sown with death.

The war twisted closely around and around in those valleys like a dog trying to bite its tail; partisans elbow to elbow with bersaglieri and Fascist militia; each side alternating between mountain and valley, making wide turns around the crests so as not to run into one another and find themselves fired on; and always someone killed, either on hill or valley. Binda's village, San Faustino, was down among fields, three groups of houses on each side of the valley. His girl, Regina, hung out sheets from her window on days when there were roundups. Binda's village was a short halt on his way up and down; a sip of milk, a clean vest ready washed by his mother; then off he had to hurry, in case the Fascists suddenly arrived, for there hadn't been enough partisans killed at San Faustino.



* * *



All winter it was a game of hide and seek; the bersaglieri at Baiardo, the Militia at Molini, the Germans at Briga, and in the middle of them the partisans squeezed into two corners of the valley, avoiding the round-ups by moving from one to the other during the night. That very night a German column was marching on Briga, had perhaps already reached Carmo, and the Militia were getting ready to reinforce Molini. The partisan detachments were sleeping in stalls around half-spent braziers; Binda marched along in the dark woods, with their salvation in his legs, for the order he carried was: "Evacuate the valleys at once. Entire battalion and heavy machine guns to be on Mount Pellegrino by dawn."

Binda felt anxiety fluttering in his lungs like bats' wings; he longed to grasp the slope two miles away, pull himself up it, whisper the order like a breath of wind into the grass and hear it flowing off through his mustache and nostrils, till it reached Vendetta, Serpe, Gueriglia; then scoop himself out a hole in the chestnut leaves and bury himself in it, he and Regina, first removing the cones that might prick Regina's legs; but the more leaves he scooped out the more cones he found—it was impossible to make a place for Regina's legs there, her big soft legs with their smooth thin skin.

The dry leaves and the chestnut cones rusded, almost gurgled, under Binda's feet; the squirrels, with round, glittering eyes, ran to hide at the tops of the trees. "Be quick, Binda!" the commander, Fegato, had said to him when giving him the message. Sleep rose from the heart of the night, there was a velvety feel on the inside of his eyelids; Binda would have liked to lose the path, plunge into a sea of dry leaves and swim in them until they submerged him. "Be quick, Binda!"

He was now walking on a narrow path along the upper slopes of the Tumena valley, which was still covered with ice.



* * *



The widest valley in the area, it had high sides wide apart; the one opposite him was glimmering in the dark, the one on which he was walking had bare slopes scattered with an occasional bush from which, in daytime, groups of partridges rose fluttering. Binda felt he saw a distant light, down in lower Tumena, moving ahead of him. It zigzagged every now and again as if going around a curve, vanished, and reappeared a little farther on in an unexpected spot. Who on earth could it be at that hour? Sometimes it seemed to Binda that the light was much farther away, on the other side of the valley, sometimes that it had stopped, and sometimes that it was behind him. Who could be carrying so many different lights along all the paths of lower Tumena—perhaps in front of him, too, in higher Tumena—winking on and off like that? The Germans!

Following on Binda's tracks was an animal roused from deep back in his childhood; it was coming after him, would soon catch up with him: the animal of fear. Those lights were the Germans searching Tumena, bush by bush, in battalions. Impossible, Binda knew, although it would be almost pleasant to believe it, to abandon himself to the blandishments of that animal from childhood, which was following him so closely. Time was drumming, gulping in Binda's throat. Perhaps it was too late now to arrive before the Germans and save his comrades. Already Binda could see Vendetta's hut at Castagna burned out, the bleeding bodies of his comrades, the heads of some of them hanging by their long hair on branches of larch trees. "Be quick, Binda!"

He was amazed at where he was, for he seemed to have gone such a little way in such a long time; perhaps he had slowed down or even stopped without realizing it. He did not change his pace, however; he knew well that it was always



* * *



regular and sure, that he mustn't trust the animal that came to visit him on these night missions, wetting his temples with its invisible fingers slimy with saliva. Binda was a healthy lad, with good nerves, cool in every eventuality; and he held on to all his power to act even though he was carrying that animal around with him like a monkey tethered to his neck.

The surface of the Colla Bracca meadow looked soft in the moonlight. "Mines!" thought Binda. There were no mines up there, Binda knew; they were a long way off, on the other slope of the mountain. But now Binda began thinking that the mines might have moved underground from one part of the mountain to the other, following his steps like enormous underground spiders. The earth above mines produces strange funguses, disastrous to knock over; everything would go up in a second, but each second would become as long as a century and the world would have stopped as if by magic.

Now Binda was going down through the wood. Drowsiness and darkness drew gloomy masks on the tree trunks and bushes. There were Germans all around. They must have seen him pass the Colla Bracca meadow in the moonlight, they were following him, waiting for him at the entrance to the wood. An owl hooted nearby: it was a whistle, a signal for the Germans to close in around him. There, another whistle; he was surrounded! An animal moved behind a bush of heather; perhaps it was a hare, perhaps a fox, perhaps a German lying in the thickets keeping him covered. There was a German in every thicket, a German perched at the top of every tree, with the squirrels. The stones were pullulating with helmets, rifles were sprouting among the branches, the roots of the trees ended in human feet. Binda was walking between a double row of hidden Germans, who were looking at him with glisten-



* * *



ing eyes from among the leaves; the farther he walked the deeper he penetrated their ranks. At the third, the fourth, the sixth hoot of the owl all the Germans would jump to their feet around him, their guns pointed, their chests crossed by Stengun straps.

One named Gund, in the middle of them, with a terrible white smile under his helmet, would stretch out huge hands to seize him. Binda was afraid to turn around in case he saw Gund looming above his shoulders, Sten gun at the ready, hands open in the air. Or perhaps Gund would appear on the path ahead, pointing a finger at him, or come up and begin walking silently along beside him.

Suddenly he thought he must have missed the way; yet he recognized the path, the stones, the trees, the smell of musk. But they were stones, trees, musk from another place, far away, from a thousand different faraway places. After these stone steps there should be a short drop, not a bramble bush. After that slope a bush of broom, not of holly; the side of the path should be dry, not full of water and frogs. The frogs were in another valley, near the Germans; at the turn of the path there was a German ambush waiting and he'd suddenly fall into their hands, find himself facing the big German named Gund who is deep down in all of us, and who opens his enormous hands above us all, yet never succeeds in catching us.

To drive away Gund he must think of Regina, scoop a niche for Regina in the snow; but the snow is hard and frozen —Regina can't sit on it in her thin dress; nor can she sit under the pines—there are endless layers of pine needles; the earth beneath is all ant hills, and Gund is already above, lowering his hands to their heads and throats, lowering still.



* * *



... He gave a shriek. No, he must think of Regina, the girl who is in all of us and for whom we all want to scoop a niche deep in the woods—the girl with big hips, dressed only in hair that falls down over her shoulders.

But the pursuit between Binda and Gund is nearing its end; Vendetta's camp is now only fifteen, twenty minutes away. Though Binda's thoughts run ahead, his feet go on placing themselves regularly one in front of the other so he won't lose breath. When he reaches his comrades his fear will have vanished, canceled even from the bottom of his memory as something impossible. He must think of waking up Vendetta and Sciabola, the commissar, to explain Fegato's order to them; then he'll set off again for Serpe's camp.

But would he ever reach the hut? Wasn't he tied by a wire that dragged him farther away the nearer he got? And as he arrived wouldn't he hear ausch ausch from Germans sitting around the fire eating up the remaining chestnuts? Binda imagined himself arriving at the hut to find it half burned out and deserted. He would go inside : empty. But in a corner, huge, sitting on his haunches, with his helmet touching the ceiling, would be Gund, with his eyes round and glistening like the squirrels' and his white toothy smile between damp lips. Gund would make a sign to him: "Sit down." And Binda would sit down.

There, a hundred yards off, a light! It was them! Which of them? He longed to turn back, to flee, as if all the danger were up there in the hut. But he walked on quickly, his face hard and closed like a fist. Now the fire suddenly seemed to be getting too near—was it moving to meet him?—now to be getting farther off—was it running away? But it was motionless, a campfire that had not yet gone out, as Binda knew.



* * *



"Who goes there?"

He did not quiver an eyelash. "Binda," he said.

Sentry: "I'm Civetta. Any news, Binda?"

"Is Vendetta asleep?"

Now he was inside the hut, with sleeping comrades breathing all around him. Comrades, of course; who could ever have thought they'd be anything else?

"Germans down at Briga, Fascists up at Molini. Evacuate. By dawn you're all to be up on the crest of Mount Pellegrino with the heavies."

Vendetta, scarcely awake, was fluttering his eyelids. "God," he said. Then he got up, clapped his hands. "Wake up, everyone, we've got to go out and fight."

Binda was now sucking at a can of boiled chestnuts, spitting out the bits of skin sticking to them. The men divided up into shifts for carrying the ammunition and the tripod of the heavy. He set off. "I'm going on to Serpe's," he said. "Be quick, Binda!" exclaimed his comrades.



* * *



HUNGER AT BÉVERA

The front had stopped there, as it had in '40, except that this time the war did not end and there seemed no chance that things would move. People did not want to do as they had in '40, load a few rags and chickens on to a cart and set off with a mule in front and a goat behind. When they got back in '40 they had found all their drawers overturned on the floor and human excrement in the cooking pots; for Italians, when soldiers, don't bother whether the damage they do is to friends or enemies. So people stayed on, with the French shells hitting their houses day and night and the German shells whistling over their heads.

"One day or another, when they really decide to advance," people said, and had to go on repeating this to each other from September 1944 to April 1945, "they'll put their backs into it, those blessed Allies will."

The valley of Bévera was full of people, peasants and also refugees from Ventimiglia, and they had nothing to eat; there were no reserves of food, and flour had to be fetched from the town. And the road into the town was under shellfire night and day.



* * *



By now they were living more in holes than in houses; one day the men of the village collected in a cave to decide what to do.

"What we'll have to do," said the man from the Committee of Liberation, "is take turns going down to Ventimiglia to fetch bread."

"Fine," said another. "So one by one we'll all be blown to bits on the way."

"Or if not, the Germans will get us one by one and off we'll go to Germany," said a third.

And another asked, "What about an animal to transport the stuff? Will anyone offer theirs? No one'll risk it who still has one. Obviously whoever gets through won't come back, any more than animals or bread."

The animals had already been requisitioned, and anyone who'd saved his kept it hidden.

"Well," said the man from the committee, "if we don't get bread here, how are we going to live? Is there anyone who feels like taking a mule down to Ventimiglia? I'm wanted by the Fascists down there or I'd go myself."

He looked around; the men were sitting on the floors of the cave with expressionless eyes, scooping at the tufa with their fingers.

Then old Bisma, who'd been down at the end, looking around with his mouth open and not understanding anything, got up and went out of the cave. The others thought he wanted to urinate: he was old and needed to fairly often.

"Careful, Bisma," they shouted after him. "Do it under cover."

But he did not turn around.

"As far as he's concerned they might not be shelling at all," someone said. "He's deaf and doesn't notice."



* * *



Bisma was more than eighty and his back seemed permanently bent under a load of faggots—all the faggots he had hauled throughout his life from woods to stalls. They called him Bisma because of his mustaches, which had once, they said, looked like Bismarck's; now they were a pair of scraggy white tufts that seemed about to fall off at any moment, like all the other parts of his body. Nothing fell off, though, and Bisma dragged himself along, his head swaying, with the expressionless and rather mistrustful look that deaf people have.

He reappeared at the mouth of the cave.

"Eeee!" he was calling.

Then the others saw that he was dragging his mule behind him, and that he'd put on its pack saddle. Bisma's mule seemed older than its master; its neck was flat as a board and hung to the ground, and its movements were cautious, as if the jutting bones were about to break through its skin and appear through the sores, black with flies.

"Where're you taking the mule to, Bisma?" they asked.

He swayed his head from side to side, with his mouth open. He couldn't hear.

"The sacks," he said. "Give them to me."

"Hey," they exclaimed. "How far d'you think you're going to get, you and that old bag of bones?"

"How many pounds?" he asked. "Well? How many pounds?"

They gave him the sacks, indicating the number of pounds on their fingers, and off he set. At every whistle of a shell the men peered out from the threshold of the cave, at the road and at that bent figure drawing farther away; both the mule and the man riding on the pack saddle seemed to be swaying and looked as if they might fall down at any minute. The shells were falling ahead of them, raising a thick dust, pitting



* * *



the track in front of the mule's cautious steps; and when they fell behind Bisma did not even turn around. At every shell fired, at every whistle, the men held their breath. "This one'll get him," they said. Suddenly he vanished altogether, wrapped in dust. The men were silent; when the dust settled they would see a bare road, without even a trace of him. Instead both reappeared like ghosts, the man and the mule, and went hobbling slowly along. Then they got to the last turn in the road and moved out of sight. "He won't make it," said the men, and turned their backs.

But Bisma kept riding along the stony road. The old mule kept putting its hoofs down uncertainly on the surface pitted with flints and new holes; its skin was stretched tight from the burning of the sores under its pack saddle. The explosions made no impression on it; it had suffered so much in its life that nothing could make any impression on it any more. It was walking along with its muzzle bent down, and its eyes, limited by the black blinkers, were noticing all sorts of things : snails, broken by the shelling, spilling an iridescent slime on the stones; ant hills ripped open and the black and white ants hurrying hither and thither with eggs; torn-up grasses showing strange hairy roots like trees.

And the man riding on the pack saddle was trying to keep himself upright on the thin haunches, while all his poor bones were starting in their sockets at the roughness of the road. But he had lived his life with mules, and his ideas were as few and as resigned as theirs; it had always been long and tiring to find his bread, bread for himself and bread for others, and now bread for the whole of Bévera. The world, this silent world which surrounded him, seemed to be trying to speak to him, too, with confused boomings that reached even his sleeping eardrums, and strange disturbances of the earth. He could



* * *



see banks crumbling, clouds rising from the fields, stones flying, and red flashes appearing and disappearing on the hills; the world was trying to change its old face and show its underbelly of earth and roots. And the silence, the terrible silence of his old age, was ruffled by those distant sounds.

The road at the mule's feet sent out huge sparks, its nostrils and throat filled with earth, a hail of splintered stones hit the man and the mule from the side while the branches of a big olive tree whirled in the air above. Yet the man wouldn't fall unless the mule fell. And the mule held on, its hoofs rooted in the torn-up earth, its knees just not giving way.

In the evening, up at Bévera, someone shouted, "Look! It's Bisma coming back! He's made it!"

Then the men and women and children came out of the houses and caves and saw the mule at the last turn of the road, coming ahead more bent than ever under the weight of sacks, and Bisma behind, on foot, hanging on to its tail so that they couldn't tell whether he was pushing or being pulled.

Bisma had a great welcome from the people of the valley when he got in with the bread. It was distributed in the big cave; the inhabitants passed through one by one while the man from the committee handed out a loaf a head. Near him stood Bisma, munching his loaf with his few teeth and looking around at everyone.

Bisma went to Ventimiglia the next day, too. His mule was the only animal the Germans were sure not to want. He went down every day to fetch bread, and every day he passed unhurt through the shells; he must have made a deal with the devil, they said.

Then the Germans evacuated the left bank of the Bévera River, blew up two bridges and a piece of road, and laid down mines. The inhabitants were given forty-eight hours to leave



* * *



the village and the area. They left the village but not the area : back they went into their holes. But now they were isolated, caught between two fronts, with no way of getting supplies. It meant starvation.

When they heard the village had been evacuated, the Black Brigade came up. They were singing. One of them was carrying a tin of paint and a brush. On the walls he wrote: They shall not pass. We go straight ahead. The Axis does not give way.

Meanwhile, the others were wandering around the streets, with Sten guns on their shoulders, glancing at the houses. Then they began breaking in a door or two with their shoulders. At that moment Bisma appeared on his mule. He appeared at the top of a road on a slope, and came down between two rows of houses.

"Hey, where are you going?" said the men of the Black Brigade.

The old man did not seem to see them; the mule went on putting one wobbly leg in front of the other.

"Hey, we're talking to you!" The haggard, impassive old man, perched on that skeleton of a mule, seemed a ghost issued from the stones of the uninhabited and half-ruined village.

"He's deaf," they said.

The old man looked at them, one by one. The Black Brigade men went down a side alley. They reached a little square where the only sounds were water trickling in the fountain and distant guns.

"I know there's stuff in that house," said one of the Black Brigade, pointing. He was only a boy, with a red blotch under his eye. The echo among the houses of the empty square repeated his words one by one. The boy made a nervous gesture. The one with the brush wrote on a ruined wall: Honor Is



* * *



Struggle. A window that had been left open was banging and making more noise than the guns.

"Wait," said the boy with the red blotch to two others who were pushing at a door. He put the mouth of his Sten gun against the lock and fired a burst. The lock, all burned out, gave way. At that moment Bisma reappeared from the direction opposite to the one where they'd left him. He seemed to be promenading up and down the village on that ruin of a mule.

"Wait till he's passed," said one of the Black Brigade, and they stood in front of the door looking indifferent.

Rome or Death, wrote the man with the brush.

Very slowly, the mule crossed the square; every step seemed to be its last. The man riding it appeared to be on the point of falling asleep.

"Go away," shouted the boy with the blotch. "The village is evacuated."

Bisma did not turn around, intent on piloting his mule across that empty square.

"If we see you again," went on the same boy, "we'll shoot."

We shall win, wrote the man with the brush.

Now only Bisma's decrepit back could be seen above the black legs of the mule, which seemed almost halted.

"Let's go down there," decided the Black Brigade men and they turned under an arch.

"Hey. No time to lose. Let's begin with this house." They opened it up, and the boy with the blotch entered first. The bouse was empty, with nothing in it but echoes. They wandered around the rooms and came out again.

"I'd like to set fire to the whole village, I would," said the boy with the blotch.

We shall go straight ahead, wrote the other man.



* * *



At the end of the little alley Bisma reappeared. He advanced toward them.

"Don't," said the Black Brigade men to the boy with the blotch, who was taking aim.

Duce, wrote the other man.

But the boy with the blotch had fired a burst. They were mown down together, the man and the mule, but they remained on foot. It seemed as if the mule had fallen on its four hoofs and still, black spindly legs, all in one piece. The Black Brigade stood looking on; the boy with the blotch had loosened the sten gun on its holster and was picking his teeth. Then they bowed together, man and mule, and seemed to take another step; instead they fell down in a heap.

That night the people of the village came to take them away. Bisma they buried; the mule they cooked and ate. It was tough meat, but they were hungry.



* * *



GOING TO HEADQUARTERS

It was a sparse wood, almost destroyed by fire, gray with charred tree trunks amid the dry reddish needles of the pines. Two men, one armed, the other unarmed, were zigzagging down between the trees.

"To headquarters," the armed man was saying. "To headquarters, that's where we're going. Half an hour's walk at the most."

"And then?"

"Then what?"

"Then will they let me go?" said the unarmed man. He was listening to every syllable of every reply as if searching for a false note.

"Yes, they'll let you go," said the armed man. "I hand them the papers from battalion, they enter them on their list, then you can go home."

The unarmed man shook his head, looking pessimistic.

"Oh, they take a long time, these things do. I know ..." he said, perhaps just to hear the other man repeat, "They'll let you go at once, I tell you."



* * *



"I was hoping," the unarmed man went on, "I was hoping to be home this afternoon. Ah, well, patience."

"You'll make it, I tell you," replied the armed man. "Just a few questions, and they'll let you go. They've got to cross off your name from the list of spies."

"Have you got a list of spies?"

"Of course we have. We know 'em all, the spies. And we get 'em, one by one."

"And my name's on it?"

"Yes, your name, too. They must cross it off properly now, or you risk being taken again."

"Then I really should go there myself, so I can explain the whole thing to them."

"We're going there now. They have to look into it properly to check."

"But by now," said the unarmed man, "by now you all know I'm on your side and have never been a spy."

"Exactly. We know all about it now. You don't have to worry now."

The unarmed man nodded and looked around. They were in a big clearing, with mangy pines and larches killed by fire and draped with fallen branches. They had left, refound, and lost the path again, and were walking apparently at random among the scattered pines through the wood. The unarmed man did not know this area. Evening was creeping up in thin layers of mist. Down below, the woods were lost in the dark. It worried him, their leaving the path; the other seemed to be walking at random. He tried bearing right, hoping to find the path again; the other also bore right, apparently at random. Then the unarmed man turned wherever the walking was easier, with the armed man following him.



* * *



He decided to ask, "But where's the headquarters?"

"We're going toward it," replied the armed man. "You'll soon see it now."

"But what place, what area is it, more or less?"

"Well," he replied, "one can't say headquarters is in any place or area. Headquarters is wherever it is. You understand?"

He understood; he was a person who understood things. But he asked, "Isn't there a path to it?"

The other replied, "A path? You understand. A path always goes somewhere. One doesn't get to headquarters by paths. You understand."

The unarmed man understood; he was a person who understood things, an astute man.

He asked, "D'you often go to headquarters?"

"Often," said the armed man. "Yes, often."

He had a sad face, with a vacant look. Apparently he didn't know those parts very well. Every now and again he seemed lost, yet he went walking on as if it did not matter.

'And why have they told you to take me along today?" asked the unarmed man, scrutinizing him.

"That's my job, to take you along," he replied. "I'm the one who takes people along to headquarters."

"You're their courier, are you?"

"That's right," said the armed man. "Their courier."

"A strange courier"—thought the unarmed man—"who doesn't know the way. But"—he thought—"today he doesn't want to go by the paths in case I realize where the headquarters is, for they don't trust me. A bad sign, their not trusting me yet," the unarmed man couldn't help thinking. But though it was a bad sign, it did mean that they really were bringing him to headquarters and intended to let him go free.



* * *



Another bad sign, apart from this, was that the woods were getting thicker and thicker. Then there was the silence and this gloomy armed man.

"Did you take the secretary along to headquarters, too? And the brothers from the mill? And the schoolmistress?" He asked this question all in one breath, without stopping to think, for it was the decisive question, the question that meant everything; the secretary of the commune, the brothers from the mill, the schoolmistress, were all people who had been taken away and never returned, of whom nothing more had ever been heard.

"The secretary was a Fascist," said the armed man. "The brothers from the mill were in the Militia, the schoolmistress worked with the Fascists."

"I just wondered, since they'd never come back."

"What I mean is," insisted the armed man, "they were what they were. You're what you are. There's no comparison."

"Of course," said the other. "There's no comparison. I only asked what had happened to them out of curiosity."

He felt sure of himself, the unarmed man did, enormously sure of himself. He was the astutest man in the village; it was difficult to get the better of him. The others, the secretary and the schoolmistress, had not come back; he would come back. "I big Kamerad," he would say to the German sergeant. "Partisan not kaput me. I kaput all partisans." Perhaps the sergeant might laugh.

But the burned trees seemed interminable and ambiguous and his thoughts were surrounded by darkness and the unknown, like the bare spaces in the middle of these woods.

"I don't know about the secretary and the others. I'm the courier."



* * *



"They'll know at headquarters though?" insisted the unarmed man.

"Yes. Ask them at headquarters. They'll know there."

Dusk was falling. He had to walk carefully in the undergrowth, watching where his feet went in case they slipped on rocks hidden under the thick scrub; and watching where his thoughts went, too, as they followed each other in growing disquiet, in case they suddenly plunged headlong into panic.

Surely if they'd thought him a spy they would never have let him go through the woods like this, alone with this man who didn't seem to be taking any notice of him at all; he could have escaped from him any time he wanted. Suppose he tried to escape now—what would the other man do?

As he wound down among the trees the unarmed man began to draw a little way off, to bear left when the other bore right. But the armed man went on walking almost, it seemed, without taking any notice of him; down through the sparse woods they went, now some distance from each other. Sometimes they even lost sight of each other, hidden by trunks and shrubs; then suddenly the unarmed man would turn around and see the other above him.

"If they let me free for a moment, this time they won't get me again," the unarmed man had thought till then. But now he surprised himself thinking, "If I manage to escape, then this time ..." And already in his mind he saw Germans, columns of Germans, Germans in trucks and armored cars, a sight that meant death for the others and safety for him, who was an astute man, a man no one could get the better of.

Now they were out of the glades and undergrowth and entering thick green woods, untouched by fire; the ground was covered with dry pine needles. The armed man had remained



* * *



behind; perhaps he had taken another route. Then, very cautiously, his tongue between his teeth, the unarmed man hurried his pace, pushing deeper into the thick woods, flinging himself down slopes, among the pine trees. He was escaping, he suddenly realized. He had a moment of panic; but he realized also that he'd got too far away now and that the other must have noticed he was trying to escape and was sure to be following him. The only thing to do was go on running, for things might be ugly if he came within the other's range again after trying to escape.

He turned at the sound of a footstep above him; a few yards away the armed man was coming toward him with his calm, indifferent pace. His gun was in his hand. He said, "There must be a short cut this way," and gestured the other to go ahead of him.

Everything then went back to the way it was before: an ambiguous world, where things might go completely wrong or completely right; the wood thickening instead of thinning out, this man who'd almost let him escape without a word.

He asked, "Does it go on forever, this wood?"

"Just around the hillside and there we are," said the other. "Bear up, you'll be home by tonight."

"Are they sure to let me go, just like that? I mean, won't they keep me there as a hostage, for instance?"

"We aren't Germans; we don't take hostages. At the most they might take your boots as hostages: we're all nearly barefoot."

The man began to grumble as if his boots were the one thing he was frightened of losing, but at heart he was pleased; every detail of his future, good or bad, helped to restore a slight feeling of confidence.



* * *



"Well," said the armed man. "Since you hold by your boots so much, let's do this : you put on mine until we get to headquarters, and since mine are all in pieces they won't take them off you. I'll put on yours, and when I come back with you I'll hand them over again."

Even a child would have realized this was just a trick. The armed man wanted his boots; all right, the unarmed man would give him whatever he wanted; he was a man who understood, and felt pleased at getting off so cheaply. "I great Kamerad," he'd say to the German sergeant. "I give them boots and they let me go." Perhaps the sergeant would let him have a pair of knee boots like the ones German soldiers wore.

"Then you don't hold anyone hostage? Not even the secretary and the others?"

"The secretary had three of our comrades taken; the brothers from the mill went on round-ups with the Militia; the schoolmistress went to bed with the men of the Tenth Flotilla."*

The unarmed man halted. He said: "You don't by any chance think I'm a spy, too? You haven't by any chance brought me here to kill me?" And he bared a few teeth as if in a smile.

"If we thought you a spy," said the armed man, "I wouldn't do this." He snapped back the safety catch of the gun. "And this." He put it to his shoulder and made a motion as if about to fire at him.

"There," thought the spy. "He's not firing."

But the other never lowered his gun; he pressed the trigger instead.

"In salvos, it fires in salvos," the spy just had time to think.

* Tenth Motor Torpedo Boat Flotilla (Decima Mas); Fascist Marines.



* * *



And when he felt the bullets hitting him like fiery fists that never stopped, the thought still crossed his mind, "He thinks he's killed me, but I'm alive."

He fell face downward and the last shot caught him with a vision of stockinged feet and his boots being pulled off.

So he remained, a corpse in the depth of the woods, his mouth full of pine needles. Two hours later he was already black with ants.



* * *



THE CROW COMES LAST

The current was a network of light transparent ripples with the water flowing in the middle. Every now and again silver wings seemed to flutter on the surface, a trout's back glittering before it zigzagged down.

"It's full of trout," said one of the men.

"If we throw a grenade in, they'll all come to the surface with their bellies in the air," said the other; he took a grenade from his belt and began to unscrew the cap.

Then a boy who was watching stepped forward, a mountaineer with an apple face. "Give it to me," he said and took the rifle from one of the men. "What does he want?" said the man and tried to take the rifle away. But the boy was aiming the gun at the water as if looking for a target. "If you fire into the water you'll frighten the fish, that's all," the man tried to say, but he didn't even finish. A trout had surfaced with a flash, and the boy had fired a shot at it as if expecting it at that very spot. And the trout was now floating with its white belly in the air. "O-o-oh!" said the men. The boy reloaded the gun and swung it around; the air was bright and tight; the pine needles on the other bank and the ripples on



* * *



the current showed up clearly. Something darted to the surface; another trout. He fired; it was floating, dead. The men looked at the trout and then at him. "He's a good shot, this kid," they said.

The boy swung the muzzle of the gun around again. It was strange, thinking it over, to be so surrounded by air, separated from other things by yards of air. When he aimed the gun, on the other hand, the air was a straight invisible line drawn tight from the mouth of the rifle to the target, to the hawk flying up there in the sky with wings that did not seem to move. When he pressed the trigger, the air was still as empty and transparent as before, but up there, at the other end of the line, the hawk was folding its wings and dropping like a stone. From the open bolt floated the good smell of gunpowder.

They gave him some more cartridges when he asked for them. Lots of men were looking on now from the bank behind him. Why, he thought, could he see the pine cones at the tops of the trees on the other bank and not touch them? Why was there this empty distance between things and himself? Why were the pine cones—which seemed part of him, inside his eyes—so far away instead? Surely it was an illusion when he aimed the gun into the empty distance and touched the trigger and at the same second a pine cone dropped in smithereens? The sense of emptiness felt like a caress—emptiness inside the rifle barrel continuing through the air and filling out when he shot; the pine cone up there, a squirrel, a white stone, a butterfly. "He never misses once, this kid," said the men, and none of them felt like laughing.

"You come with us," said the commander. "If you give me a rifle," replied the boy. "Well, of course." So he went.



* * *



He left with two cheeses and a haversack full of apples. The village was a blotch of slate, straw, and cow dung at the bottom of the valley. It was fine to leave, because there were new things to be seen at every turn, trees with cones, birds flying from branches, lichen on stones, all at those false distances, the distances that could be filled by a shot swallowing the air in between. He must not fire, though, they told him: these parts had to be passed in silence, and the cartridges were needed for the war. But at a certain point a hare, frightened by their steps, ran across the path amid waves and shouts from the men. Just as it was vanishing into the thickets, a bullet from the boy stopped it. "Good shot," even the commander said, "but we're not out hunting here. You mustn't fire again even if you see a pheasant." Not an hour passed before more shots rang out from the file of men. "That boy again!" cried the commander furiously and went up to him. The boy was laughing all over his pink-and-white apple face. "Partridges," he said, showing them. "They rose from a thicket." "Partridges or grasshoppers, I told you. Give me that rifle. And if you make me angry again, you go back home." The boy grumbled a bit; it wasn't much fun walking along unarmed; but if he stayed with them there was always a chance of getting the rifle back.

That night they slept in a shepherd's hut. The boy woke up as the first light was showing in the sky, while the others were asleep. He took their best rifle, filled his haversack with cartridges, and took off. The early-morning air was mild and bright. Not far from the hut was a mulberry tree. It was the hour when the jays arrived. There was one; he fired, ran to fetch it, and put it in his haversack. Without moving from the spot he tried another target; a squirrel! Terrified by the



* * *



shot, it was running to hide at the top of a chestnut tree. Now it was dead, a big squirrel with a gray tail, which shed tufts of hair when touched. From under the chestnut tree he saw a toadstool, red with white spots, poisonous, in a meadow lower down. He pulverized it with a shot, then went to see if he had really hit it. It was a lovely game going like this from one target to another; perhaps he could go around the world doing it. He saw a big snail on a stone and aimed at its shell; when he got to the place he found only the splintered stone and a little iridescent slime.

So he gradually got farther and farther away from the hut, down among unknown fields. From the stone he saw a lizard on a wall, from the wall a puddle and a frog, from the puddle a signpost on the road with a zigzag on it and below it ... below it were men in uniform coming up with arms at the ready. When they saw that boy with a rifle smiling all over his pink-and-white apple face, they shouted and aimed their guns at him. But the boy had already picked out some gilt buttons on the chest of one of them and fired at a button. He heard the men's shouts and the bullets whistling singly or in bursts over his head; but he was now lying stretched on the ground behind a heap of stones at the roadside, under cover. It was a long heap, and he could move about, peep over at some unexpected point, see the gleam on the barrels of the soldiers' weapons, the gray and glittering parts of their uniforms, shoot at a stripe, a badge. Then he'd drop back to the ground and slide quickly over to another side to fire. After a bit he heard bursts from behind him firing over his head and hitting the soldiers; these were his comrades coming to reinforce him with machine guns. "If that boy hadn't woken us with his shots ..." they were saying.



* * *



Covered by his comrades' fire, the boy could take better aim. Suddenly a bullet grazed one of his cheeks. He turned; a soldier had reached the road above him. He flung himself into a hole under cover, but had fired meanwhile and hit not the soldier but the rifle, by the bolt. He heard the soldier trying to reload, then fling the gun on the ground. The boy looked out then and fired at the soldier, who'd taken to his heels; the bullet tore off a shoulder strap.

He followed. Every now and again the soldier vanished in the wood, then reappeared. The boy nipped off the top of his helmet, then a strap on his belt. Meanwhile they had reached a remote valley where the sound of battle didn't reach. Suddenly the soldier found there were no more woods in front of him, only a glade, with thick bushy slopes. The boy was just coming out of the wood now; in the middle of the glade was a big rock; the soldier just had time to crouch down behind it, with his head between his knees. There for the moment he felt safe; he had some hand grenades with him and the boy could get no nearer, but could only keep the rock covered in case the soldier tried to escape. If only, thought the soldier, he could make a run for the bushes and slide down the thickly covered slope. But that bare space had to be crossed —how long would the boy stay there? And would he never lower that gun?

The soldier decided to make a test; he put his helmet on the point of his bayonet and hoisted it slightly above the rock. A shot rang out and the helmet rolled to the ground, pierced through.

The soldier did not lose heart; it was obviously easy to aim at the edges of the rock, but if he moved quickly it should be impossible to hit him. At that moment a bird winged



* * *



quickly across the sky, a pigeon perhaps. One shot and it fell. The soldier dried the sweat on his neck. Another bird passed, a thrush; that fell, too. The soldier swallowed saliva. This must be a place of passage; birds went on flying overhead, all of them different, and the boy went on shooting and bringing them down. An idea came to the soldier: "If he is watching the birds he won't be watching me so much. The second he fires I'll run for it." But perhaps it would be better to make a test first. He took up the helmet again and put it back on the point of his bayonet, ready. Two birds passed together, snipe. The soldier was sorry to waste such a good opportunity for the test, but he did not dare risk it yet. The boy fired at one of the snipe, then the soldier pushed up the helmet, heard the shot and saw the helmet whirl in the air.

Now the soldier felt a taste of lead in his mouth; he scarcely noticed the other bird falling at a new shot. He must not hurry things, anyway; he was safe behind that rock, with his grenades. And why not try and get him with a grenade, while staying under cover? He stretched back on the ground, drew his arm out behind him, taking care not to show himself, gathered up all his strength and threw the grenade. A good effort; it would have gone a long way; but in the middle of its flight a shot exploded it in mid-air. The soldier flung himself on the ground to avoid the shrapnel.

When he raised his head the crow had come. It was wheeling slowly around in the sky above him. Was it a crow? he wondered. Now the boy would be certain to shoot it down. But the shot seemed to be a long time in coming. Perhaps the crow was flying too high? And yet he had hit other birds flying higher and faster. Finally there was a shot; now the crow would fall, but no, it went on flying around in slow impassive



* * *



turns. A pine cone fell though, from a tree nearby. Was he beginning to shoot at pine cones now? One by one other pine cones were hit and fell with little thuds. At every shot the soldier looked at the crow; was he falling? No, the black bird was making lower and lower turns above him. Surely it was impossible the boy hadn't seen it? Perhaps the crow did not exist? Perhaps it was a hallucination of his? Perhaps when one is about to die one sees every kind of bird pass; when one sees the crow it means one's time has come. He must warn the boy, who was still going on firing at the pine cones. So the soldier got to his feet and pointed at the black bird. "There's a crow!" he shouted in his own language. The bullet hit him in the middle of an eagle with spread wings embroidered on his tunic.

Slowly the crow came circling down.



* * *



ONE OF THE THREE IS STILL ALIVE

Three naked men were sitting on a stone. All the men of the village were standing around them and facing a bearded old man.

"... and they were the highest flames I've ever seen in the mountains," the old man with the beard was saying. "And I said to myself: How can a village burn so high?

"And the smell of smoke was unbearable and I said to myself: How can smoke from our village stink like that?"

The tallest of the three naked men, who was hugging his shoulders because there was a slight wind, gave the oldest a dig in the ribs to get him to explain; he still wanted to understand, and the other was the only one who knew a little of the language. But the oldest of the three did not raise his head from between his hands, and now and again a quiver passed along the vertebrae on his bent back. The fat man was no longer to be counted on; the womanish fat on his body was trembling all over, his eyes were like windowpanes streaked by rain.

"And then they told me that the flames burning our houses came from our own grain, and the stink was from our sons



* * *



being burned alive; Tancin's son, Gé's son, the son of the customs guard. ..."

"My son Bastian!" shouted a man with haunted eyes. He was the only one who interrupted, every now and again. The others were standing there silent and serious, with their hands on their rifles.

The third naked man was not of exactly the same nationality as the others; he came from a part where villages and children had been burned at one time. So he knew what people think about those who burn and kill, and should have felt less hopeful than the others. Instead of which there was something, an anguished uncertainty, that prevented him from resigning himself.

"Now, we've only caught these three men," said the old man with the beard.

"Only three!" shouted the haunted-looking man; the others were still silent.

"Maybe among them, too, there are some who aren't really bad, who obey orders against their will, maybe these three are that sort...."

The haunted-looking man glared at the old man.

"Explain," whispered the tallest of the three naked men to the oldest. But the other's whole life now seemed to be running away down the vertebrae on his spine.

"When children have been killed and houses burned one can't make any distinction between those who're bad and not bad. And we're sure of being in the right by condemning these three to death."

"Death," thought the tallest of the three naked men. "I heard that word. What does it mean—'death'?"

But the oldest one took no notice of him, and the fattest



* * *



now seemed to be muttering prayers. Suddenly the fattest had remembered he was a Catholic. He had been the only Catholic in the company, and his comrades had often made fun of him. "I'm a Catholic," he began muttering in his own language. It was not clear whether he was begging for salvation on earth or in heaven.

"I say that before killing them we should ..." exclaimed the haunted-looking man, but the others had got to their feet and were not listening to him.

"To the Witch's Hole," said one with a black mustache. "So there won't be any graves to dig."

They made the three get up. The fattest put his hands over his front. Nothing made them feel more under accusation than being naked.

The peasants led them up along the rocky path, with rifles in their backs. The Witch's Hole was the opening of a vertical cave, a hole that dropped right down into the belly of the mountain, down, down, no one knew where. The three naked men were led up to the edge, and the armed peasants lined up in front of them; then the oldest of them began screaming. He screamed out despairing phrases, perhaps in his own dialect; the other two did not understand him. He was the father of a family, the oldest was, but he was also the least worthy, and his screams had the effect of making the other two feel annoyed with him and calmer in the face of death. The tall one, though, still felt that strange disquiet, as if he were not quite certain of something. The Catholic was holding his joined hands low; it was not clear whether this was to pray or to hide his front.

Hearing the eldest one screaming made the armed peasants lose their calm; they wanted to have done with the business



* * *



as soon as possible, and began to fire scattered shots without waiting for an order. The tall one saw the Catholic crumple down beside him and roll into the precipice; then the oldest of them fell with his head back and vanished, dragging his last cry down the walls of rock. Between the puffs of gunpowder the tall one saw a peasant struggling with a blocked bolt; then he, too, fell into the darkness.

A cloud of pain in the back like a swarm of stinging bees prevented him from losing consciousness at once; he had fallen through a briar bush. Then tons of emptiness weighed down on his stomach, and he fainted.

Suddenly he seemed to be back on a height, as if the earth had given a great heave; he had stopped. His fingers were wet and he smelled blood. He must be crushed to bits and about to die. But he did not feel himself getting weaker, and all the agonies of the fall were lively and distinct in his mind. He tried to move a hand, the left one; it responded. He groped along the other arm, touched his pulse, his elbow; but the arm did not feel anything; it might have been dead, for it only moved if raised by the other hand. Then he had the sensation of holding the wrist of his right arm in both hands; this was impossible. He realized that he was holding someone else's arm; he had fallen on the dead body of one of the other two. He prodded the fat flesh of the Catholic; that soft cushion had broken his fall. That was why he was alive. That was one reason; also, he remembered now, he had not been hit but had flung himself down beforehand; he could not remember if he had done it intentionally, but that was not important now. Then he discovered that he could see; some light filtered down there in the depths, and the tallest of the three naked men could make out his own hands and those sticking out of the



* * *



heap of flesh beneath him. He turned and looked up; at the top was an aperture full of light—the opening of the Witch's Hole. First it hurt his eyes like a yellow flash; once they got used to it, he could see the blueness of the sky, far away from him, twice as far as the earth's crust.

The sight of the sky plunged him into despair; it would certainly be better to be dead. There he was with his two dead companions at the bottom of a very deep pit, from which he could never get out again. He shouted. The streak of sky above became fringed with heads. "One of them's alive!" they said. They threw something down. The naked man watched it dropping like a stone, then hit against the wall, and heard an explosion. There was a niche in the rock behind him, and the naked man squeezed into it; the well was full of dust and pieces of splintered rock. He pulled at the body of the Catholic and held it up in front of the niche; it was starting to fall apart but there was nothing else he could use to shelter himself. He was just in time: another grenade came down, and reached the bottom, raising a spray of blood and stones. The corpse broke up; now the naked man had no defense or hope. In the patch of sky appeared the white beard of the big old man. The others had drawn to one side.

"Hey!" called the big man with the beard.

"Hey!" replied the naked man, from the depths.

And the big man with the beard repeated: "Hey!"

There was nothing else to say between them.

Then the big man with the beard turned around. "Throw him a rope," he said.

The naked man did not understand. He saw some of the heads leaving and the ones remaining making signs at him, signs of assurance, not to worry. The naked man looked at them with his head stuck out of the niche, not daring to



* * *



expose himself altogether, feeling the same disquiet as when he had been sitting on the stone during the trial. But the peasants were not throwing grenades any more; they were looking down and asking him questions, to which he replied with groans. The rope did not come, and one by one the peasants left the edge. Then the naked man came out of his hiding place and looked at the distance separating him from the top, the walls of sheer naked rock.

At that moment appeared the face of the haunted man. He was looking around and smiling. Then he moved back from the edge of the Witch's Hole, aimed his rifle into it, and fired. The naked man heard the bullet whistle past his ear; the Witch's Hole was a narrow shaft and not quite vertical, so things thrown in rarely reached the bottom, and bullets easily hit a layer of rock and stopped there. He squatted in his refuge, with foam on his lips, like a dog. Now up there all the peasants were back and one was unwinding a long rope down the shaft. The naked man watched the rope coming down but did not move.

"Hey!" the one with the black mustache shouted down. "Catch hold of it and come up."

But the naked man stayed in his niche.

"Come on; up you go," they shouted. "We won't do you any harm."

And they made the rope dance about in front of his eyes. The naked man was frightened.

"We won't do you any harm. We swear it," the men were saying, trying to sound sincere. And they were sincere; they wanted to save him at all costs so as to be able to shoot him all over again; but at that moment they just wanted to save him, and their voices had a tone of affection, of human brotherhood.



* * *



The naked man sensed all this, and anyway he had little choice; he put a hand on the rope. But then among the men holding it he saw the head of the man with the haunted eyes, and he dropped the rope and hid himself. They had to begin convincing him, begging him, all over again; finally he decided and began going up. The rope was full of knots and easy to climb; he could also catch hold of jutting bits of rock. As the naked man moved slowly up toward the light, he saw the heads of the peasants at the top becoming clearer and bigger. Then the man with the haunted eyes reappeared all of a sudden and the others did not have time to hold him back; he was holding an automatic gun and began firing it at once. At the first burst the rope broke right above the naked man's hands. He crashed down, knocking against the sides, and fell back on the remains of his companions. Up there, against the sky, he saw the man with the beard waving his arms and shaking his head.

The others were trying to explain, in gestures and shouts, that it was not their fault, that they'd punish that madman, and that they were going to look for another rope and bring him up again. But the naked man had lost hope now; he would never be able to return to the earth's surface; he would never leave the bottom of this shaft, and he would go mad there drinking blood and eating human flesh, without ever being able to die. Up there, against the sky, there were good angels with ropes, and bad angels with grenades and rifles, and a big old man with a white beard who waved his arms but could not save him.

The armed men, seeing him unconvinced by their fair words, decided to finish him off with hand grenades, and began throwing them down. But the naked man had found another



* * *



hiding place, a narrow horizontal crack in the rock where he could slip in and be safe. At every grenade that fell he crawled deeper into this crack, until he reached a point where he could not see any more light. He went on dragging himself along on his stomach like a snake, with darkness and the damp slimy rock all around him. From being damp the rock surface beneath him was now getting wet, then covered with water; the naked man could feel the cold trickle running under his stomach. It was the passage opened under the earth by the rains coming down through the Witch's Hole : a long narrow cavern, a subterranean drain. Where would it end? Perhaps it would lose itself in blind caves in the belly of the mountain, or perhaps it would funnel the water through narrow little channels that would issue into springs. And his body would rot away there in a drain and infect the waters of the springs, poisoning entire villages.

The air was almost unbreathable; the naked man felt the moment coming when his lungs would no longer be able to hold out. Instead, the flow of water was increasing, getting deeper and quicker; the naked man was now slithering along with his whole body underwater and could clean off the crust of mud and of his own and others' blood. He did not know whether he had moved far or not; the complete darkness and that slithering movement had deprived him of all sense of distance. He was exhausted. Before his eyes luminous shapeless forms were beginning to appear. The farther he advanced, the clearer these shapes became, taking on definite though continuously transforming edges. Supposing it was not just a dazzle inside the retina of his eyes, but a light, a real light, at the end of the cavern? He had only to close his eyes, or look in the opposite direction, to make certain. But anyone



* * *



who stares at a light has a dazzled feeling at the roots of his eyes even if he shuts his lids or turns his gaze; he could not distinguish between the light outside and the lights in his own eyes, and remained in doubt.

He noticed something else new, by touch: the stalactites. Slimy stalactites were hanging from the roof of the cave and stalagmites coming up from the ground on the verges of the water, where they were not eroded. The naked man began pulling himself along by the stalactites above his head. And as he moved he noticed that his arms, from being folded to grasp the stalactites, were gradually straightening out, which meant that the cave was getting bigger. Soon the man could arch his back and walk on all fours; and the light was becoming less uncertain; he could tell now whether his eyes were open or shut, and he was beginning to make out the shapes of things, the arch of the roof, the droop of the stalactites, the black glitter of the current.

Finally he was walking erect, up the long cave toward the luminous opening, with the water to his waist—still hanging on to the stalactites, though, to keep himself straight. One stalactite seemed bigger than the others, and when the man seized it he felt it opening in his hand and a cold soft wing beating on his face. A bat! It flew off, and the other bats hanging with their heads down woke up and flew away; soon the whole cave was full of silent flying bats, and the man felt the wind from their wings around him and their skin brushing against his forehead and mouth. He walked on in a cloud until he reached the open air.

The cave came out into a torrent. Once again the naked man was on the crust of the earth, under the sky. Was he safe now? He must take care not to make any mistakes. The torrent



* * *



was running silently over white and black stones. Around it was a wood full of twisted trees; all that grew in the undergrowth was thorns and brambles. He was naked in wild and deserted parts, and the nearest human beings were enemies who would pursue him with pitchforks and guns as soon as they saw him.

The naked man climbed a willow tree. The valley was all woods and shrub-covered slopes, under a gray hump of mountain. But at the end of it, where the torrent turned, there was a slate roof with white smoke coming up. Life, thought the naked man, was a hell, with rare moments recalling some ancient paradise.



* * *



ANIMAL WOODS

On days of Fascist round-ups the woods might have been a fairground. Off the paths, among the bushes and trees, there was a constant passage of families urging along a cow or a calf, and old women leading a goat on a rope, and girls with a goose under one arm. Some of them were even escaping with their rabbits.

Wherever one went, the thicker the chestnut woods, the more one ran into heavy-bellied bulls and tinkling cows, which were finding it difficult to move on those rocky slopes. Best off were the goats, but perhaps the happiest were the mules, which just this once could move without carrying a burden and go cropping leaves along the alleys. The pigs went rooting about in the ground, pricking their snouts all over with chestnut husks; the chickens roosted in the trees and frightened the squirrels; the rabbits, which after centuries of cages had forgotten how to dig themselves lairs, took refuge in hollow tree trunks, where they were sometimes bitten by squirrels.

That morning a peasant named Giuà Dei Fichi was gathering fuel in a remote corner of the woods. He knew nothing about what was happening in the village, for he had left the



* * *



evening before, intending to gather mushrooms in the morning, and had slept in the middle of the woods in a hut used, in autumn, for drying chestnuts.

So as he was chopping a dead tree trunk with a hatchet he was surprised to hear a vague tinkling of bells far and near through the woods. He stopped chopping and heard voices getting closer. "Oo-u," he shouted.

Giuà Dei Fichi was a short, tubby little man, with a face like a full moon, dark of skin and flushed with wine; he wore a green conical hat with a pheasant's feather stuck in it, a shirt with big yellow spots under a homespun jerkin, and a red scarf around his tubby stomach to hold up trousers covered with purple blotches.

"Coo-u!" came the reply, and between the green lichenous rocks appeared a close friend, a peasant with a mustache and a straw hat, dragging behind him a big, white-bearded goat.

"What're you doing here, Giuà?" asked his friend. "The Germans've reached the village and are going around to all the animal stalls!"

"Oh!" shouted Giuà Dei Fichi. "They'll find my cow, Cochineal, and take her off!"

"Hurry up and you may still be in time to hide her," advised his friend. "We saw the column as it was coming up through the valley and we took off at once. But they may not have reached your place yet."

Giuà left his hatchet and basket of mushrooms and rushed off. As he ran through the woods he met rows of ducks that scattered quacking between his feet, and flocks of sheep marching compactly side by side without moving to let him through, and children and old women who shouted, "They've reached the Madonnetta! They're searching the houses above the



* * *



bridge! I've seen them turning the last corner before the village!" Giuà Dei Fichi speeded up his short legs, and went rolling down the slopes like a ball, and panting up the hills with his heart in his mouth.

On and on he ran till he reached a top of a hill from which opened a view of the village. A great expanse of tender early-morning air, a misty ring of hills, and in the middle the village, knobbly houses all stone and slate, heaped on top of one another. And through the thin air came the sounds of shouts in German and of fists banging against doors.

"Oh dear! The Germans are already in the houses!"

Giuà Dei Fichi was trembling all through his arms and legs; a bit of a tremor he already had from drinking, and more now came over him at the thought of his cow, Cochineal, the one possession he had in the world, about to be taken away from him.

Very quietly, cutting through fields, keeping under cover of vines, Giuà Dei Fichi drew near the village. His little house was one of the last, on the outskirts, in the middle of a green mass of pumpkins, where the village merged into vegetable patches; possibly the Germans might not have reached it yet.

Peeping around each corner, Giuà made his way into the village. He saw an empty street with the usual smells of hay and stalls; those new noises were coming from the middle of the village—inhuman voices and the stamping of iron-clad feet. There his house was—still shut up. The door of the stall on the ground floor was closed, and so was the one to the rooms at the top of the worn outside staircase, with its clumps of basil planted in cooking pots filled with earth. A voice from inside the stall said, "Mooooo." It was Cochineal recognizing the approach of her owner. Giuà blushed with pleasure.



* * *



But now from under an arcade resounded a tramp of feet; Giuà hid in a doorway, sucking in his round paunch. It was a German, with the look of a peasant, wrists and neck jutting out of his short tunic, and long, long legs and a big gun as long as himself. He had left the others to try to find something on his own; besides, the look and smells of the village reminded him of things he knew well. So he was walking along sniffing the air and looking around with a yellow, porkish face under the peak of his squashed cap. At that moment Cochineal lowed: "Mooo." She could not understand why her master had not arrived yet. The German quivered in his shrunken clothes and at once made for the stall; Giuà Dei Fichi held his breath.

He saw the German beginning to kick violently at the door; he'd break it in soon, for sure. Then Giuà slipped around the corner behind the house, went to the haystack, and began groping about under the hay. There he'd hidden his old double-barreled shotgun, with a full belt of cartridges. Giuà loaded the gun with a couple of shots, strapped the belt around his tummy, then very quietly, with the gun at the ready, went and hid behind the door of the stall.

The German was coming out, pulling Cochineal along behind him on a rope. She was a fine red cow with black markings (that was why she was called Cochineal), a young, affectionate, punctilious cow; she did not want to be taken away by this man she did not know, and was balking; the German had to pull her along by the halter.

Giuà Dei Fichi looked on, hidden behind a wall. Now, it should be said that Giuà was the worst shot in the village. Never had he succeeded in hitting, even by mistake, a squirrel, let alone a hare. When he shot at sitting thrushes, they didn't



* * *



even bother to move from the branch. No one wanted to go shooting with him, for he was apt to hit other men's behinds. He couldn't aim: his hands always trembled.

Now he pointed the gun, but his hands were trembling and the barrel of the shotgun waved about in the air. He tried to aim at the German's heart, but what he saw through the sights was the cow's rump. "Oh dear!" thought Giuà. "Suppose I fire at the German and kill Cochineal?" So he didn't dare fire.

The German was moving along very slowly with this cow; she could sense the nearness of her master and was refusing to be dragged. Suddenly he realized that his fellow soldiers had already evacuated the village and were disappearing down the road. The German tried to catch up with them, pulling that stubborn cow after him; and Giuà followed him at a distance, jumping behind bushes and walls and pointing his shotgun every now and again. But he could not manage to keep the weapon steady, and the German and the cow were always too near each other for him to dare fire a shot. Must he let the German take her away?

To reach the column in the distance, the German took a short cut through the woods. Now it was easier for Giuà to trail him by hiding among the tree trunks. And perhaps now the German would begin walking farther away from the cow so that it would be possible to shoot at him.

Once in the woods, Cochineal seemed to lose her reluctance to move, and since the German was apt to get lost among the paths which he could scarcely make out, she even began guiding him and deciding whenever two paths crossed. Before long the German realized he was not on the short cut to the main road but in the middle of a thick woods; both he and the cow were lost, in fact.



* * *



Giuà Dei Fichi, his nose scratched by branches, his feet soaked by rivulets he'd stumbled into, was still following along behind, among flapping birds taking to flight and frogs croaking in the mud. It was even more difficult to aim among the trees, with all those obstacles around and that wine-red-and-black rump, which seemed always to be there under his eyes.

The German was already looking in alarm at the thickness of the woods and wondering how he could get out of it, when he heard a rustling in an arbutus bush and out came a fine red pig. At home he'd never seen pigs wandering about in the woods. He loosened the rope on the cow and began following the pig. As soon as Cochineal felt herself free she trotted off into the woods, which was, she sensed, full of friendly creatures.

Now was the moment for Giuà to shoot. The German was fussing around the pig, clutching at it to keep it still, but it slipped away.

Giuà was about to press the trigger when nearby appeared two small children, a little boy and a little girl, wearing woolen caps with pom-poms and long stockings. Big tears were dropping from their eyes. "Aim carefully, Giuà, please," they said. "If you kill the pig we'll have nothing left!" Giuà Dei Fichi felt the gun dancing about in his hands again; he had such a soft heart and was too easily moved, not by having to kill that German but by having to risk the pig that belonged to those two poor little children.

The German was swaying about among the rocks and bushes, gripping the pig, which was wriggling about and grunting, "Ghee ... ghee ... ghee. ..." Suddenly the pig's grunts were answered by a "baaa" and out from a cave trotted a little lamb. The German let the pig go and ran after the lamb. "What strange woods," he thought, "with pigs in bushes



* * *



and lambs in caves." And he caught the lamb, which was bleating at the top of its voice, by a leg, hitched it up on his shoulder like the Good Shepherd, and started off. Very quietly Giuà Dei Fichi followed. "This time he won't escape. This time he's had it," he said to himself, and was just about to fire when a hand raised the barrel of his gun. It was an old shepherd with a white beard, who was now holding out his clasped hands toward him and saying, "Giuà, don't kill my little lamb; kill the German but don't kill my little lamb. Aim well, just this once, aim well!" But Giuà was completely confused by now, and couldn't even find the trigger.

The German on his way through the woods was making discoveries that left him open-mouthed: chickens perched on trees, guinea pigs peering from hollow trunks. It was a complete Noah's ark. He saw a turkey spreading its tail on the branch of a pine. At once he put up his hand to catch it, but the turkey gave a little skip and went to perch on a branch higher up, still spreading its tail. The German left the lamb and began climbing up the pine. But for every layer of branches he reached, the turkey went up another layer, without looking in the least put out, still preening itself, its hanging watdes aflame.

Giuà moved under the tree; there was a leafy branch on his head, two others on his shoulders, and one tied to the barrel of his gun. But then a plump young woman with a red handkerchief tied around her head came up to him. "Giuà," she said, "listen to me. If you kill the German I'll marry you; if you kill the turkey I'll bump you off." Giuà, still a bachelor though no longer young, and very modest, blushed scarlet; his gun began waving around like a spit.

The German was still climbing and had reached the small-



* * *



est branches; suddenly one of them broke under him and down he fell. He very nearly fell right on top of Giuà Dei Fichi, who did this once see straight and get away in time. But on the ground Giuà left all the branches that had been hiding him, so the German fell on them and did not hurt himself.

As he fell he saw a hare on the path. But no, it wasn't a hare; it was round and paunchy and did not run away when it heard a noise, but settled down on the ground. It was a rabbit; the German took it by the ears. He walked on, with the rabbit struggling and twisting about in all directions, so that in order not to let it escape he had to keep jumping about with his arm raised. The woods were full of lowing, bleating, and screeching. At every step were new things to be seen: a parrot on a holly branch, three goldfish wriggling in a spring.

Giuà, from astride the high branch of an ancient oak, was following the German's dance with the rabbit. But it was difficult to aim at him because the rabbit was constantly changing position and getting in between. Giuà felt a pull at a corner of his jerkin; it was a little girl with plaits and a freckly face. "Don't kill the rabbit, Giuà, please; I don't mind if you shoot the German, though."

Meanwhile, the German had reached a place covered with gray stones spotted with blue and green lichen. There were only a few bare pines growing there, and nearby opened a precipice. A hen was scratching about in the carpet of pine needles covering the ground. When the German began running after the hen, the rabbit escaped.

It was the thinnest, oldest, and scraggiest hen he had ever seen. It belonged to Girumina, the poorest old woman in the village. Now the German had it in his hands.

Giuà was lying on top of the rocks and had constructed a



* * *



pedestal of stones for his shotgun. He had even put up a sort of little fortress, with only a narrow slit for the barrel. Now he could fire without having any scruples: even if he killed that scraggy hen, little harm was done.

But now old Girumina came up to him, wrapped in her ragged black shawls, and began saying persuasively, "Giuà, it's bad enough that a German should take away my hen, the last thing I possess in all the world. But it's much worse that you should be the one to kill it."

Giuà began trembling more than ever before because of the great responsibility weighing on him. But he pulled himself together and pressed the trigger.

The German heard the shot and saw the chicken wriggling in his hands lose its tail. Another shot, and the chicken lost a wing. Was it bewitched, this chicken, that it exploded every now and again and was falling to pieces in his hands? There was another explosion and the chicken was completely feather-less, ready for roasting, and yet it still went on flapping its one wing. Seized with terror, the German was holding the chicken away from himself by the neck. Giuà's fourth cartridge cut the neck off right under his hand and left him holding the head, which was still moving. He flung it aside and ran away. But he could not find any more paths. Near him was that rocky precipice. The last tree before the precipice was a carob, and in its branches the German saw a big cat crouching.

By now he was beyond feeling any surprise at seeing domestic animals scattered in the woods, and he put out a hand to stroke the cat. Then he took it by the nape of the neck, hoping to please it and hear it purr.

For some time now the woods had been plagued by a savage



* * *



wild cat that killed birds and sometimes even got into the henhouses in the village. The German, who was expecting to hear it purr, suddenly saw the cat fling itself at him with its fur on end, and felt its claws slashing into him. In the struggle that followed both man and beast rolled over the edge of the precipice.

So it was that Giuà, a hopeless shot, was feted as the greatest partisan and huntsman in the village. And poor Girumina was bought a brood of newly hatched chicks at the expense of the community.



* * *



MINE FIELD

"Mined" was what the old man had said, waving an opened hand before his eyes, as if he were wiping a clouded pane. "All along there, didn't know exactly where. They came and mined it. We were in hiding."

The man in the baggy trousers had glanced for a moment at the slope of the mountain, then at the old man standing erect in the doorway.

"But since the end of the war," he had said then, "there's been time to do something about it. There must be some kind of path. Somebody must know."

You know it well, old man, the younger man had thought, too; because the old man was surely a smuggler and knew the frontier terrain like the bowl of his pipe.

The old man had looked at the patched, baggy trousers, the other man's limp, torn knapsack, the layer of dust covering him from hair to shoes, bearing witness to the miles he must have covered on foot. "Nobody knows just where," the old man had repeated. "The pass. It's a mine field." Then he had made that gesture, as if there were a clouded glass between himself and everything else.



* * *



"Hey, I can't be all that unlucky, can I? To go and step right on a mine?" the younger man had asked, with a smile that seemed to set the old man's teeth on edge as an unripe persimmon would.

"Huh," the old man had said then. Only that: Huh.

Now the younger man was trying to remember the tone of that huh. Because it could have been a huh, 1 should think not, or a huh, you never can tell, or a huh, nothing more likely. But the old man had uttered only a huh without any special intonation, as blank as his gaze, bleak as this mountain terrain, where even the grass was short and tough as an ill-shaven human beard.

The trees along the slopes could never grow taller than the brush; every now and then there was a twisted, rubbery pine, situated so as to cast as little shade as possible. The man was now walking along the remnants of climbing trails, gnawed away year after year by the encroaching bushes and trodden only by smugglers' footsteps, an animal tread that leaves little imprint.

"Damn this land," the man said. "I can't wait to be on the other side." Luckily he had already taken this route once, before the war, and he could do without a guide. He also knew that the pass was a broad, high gap, and they couldn't mine the whole thing.

So he had only to be careful where he set his feet: a spot with a mine underneath must surely look different somehow from all other spots. Somehow: loose dirt, stones artfully arranged, fresher grass. Over there, for example: you knew immediately there could be no mines. No mines? What about that slab of slate lying askew? That bare patch in the midst of the field? And that tree across the path? But the pass was



* * *



still far ahead. There couldn't be any mines, not yet. He walked on.

Perhaps he would have preferred to cross the mined zone at night, crawling in the darkness, not to elude the border guards—these places were safe from them—but to elude the fear of the mines, as if the mines were great dozing beasts that could waken at his passing. Marmots, enormous marmots curled up in underground lairs, with one acting as sentry on top of a rock, the way marmots do, to give the alarm with a hiss on seeing him.

At that hiss, the man thought, the mine field blows up, the enormous marmots fall on me and tear me to pieces with their teeth.

But never had a man been chewed by marmots, and never would he be blown up by mines. It was hunger that prompted these thoughts; he knew it. The man knew hunger, the tricks the imagination plays in times of hunger, when everything seen or heard assumes a meaning associated with food and chewing.

The marmots did exist, however. You could hear the hissing —"gheee ... gheeeee ..."—from up in the spills of rock. If I could succeed in killing a marmot with a stone, the man thought, and roast it on a stake ...

He thought of the greasy smell of marmot, but without nausea; hunger gave him an appetite even for marmot fat, anything that could be eaten. For a week he had been lurking around farms, approaching shepherds to beg a loaf of brown bread, a cup of clotted milk.

"If only we had some for ourselves. We don't have anything," they would say, pointing to the bare, smoke-darkened walls, decorated only with a string or two of garlic.



* * *



He came within sight of the gap before he was expecting it and felt a twinge of amazement, almost of fear, at once: he wasn't expecting the rhododendrons to be in bloom. He had thought he would find the gap bare, so he could study every stone, every bush before taking a step forward. Instead, he was plunged up to his knees in a sea of rhododendrons, a uniform, impenetrable sea from which only the humps of the gray stones surfaced.

And under it, the mines. "Don't know exactly where," the old man had said. "All along there." And then he had passed those opened hands through the air. The younger man now thought he could see the shadow of those hands fall on the expanse of rhododendrons, spreading out until it covered them.

He had chosen a route along a winding crevasse flanking the broad gap, uncomfortable for walking but also uncomfortable to mine. Farther up, the rhododendrons thinned out, and among the rocks you could hear the "gheee ... ghee ..." of the marmots, as unrelenting as the sun on the back of his neck.

Where there are marmots, he thought, heading in that direction, it's a sign there are no mines.

But this reasoning was erroneous : there were anti-personnel mines, devised to kill men; and the weight of a marmot would not be enough to trip them. He had recalled the name of the mines at this moment, "anti-personnel"; and it frightened him.

Personnel, he repeated, human beings.

That name was suddenly enough to frighten him. Certainly, if they mine a pass it was in order to make it completely useless. He had better turn back, question the men of the area more closely, try some other way.

He turned to retrace his steps. But where had he set his



* * *



foot before? The rhododendrons stretched out behind him, a vegetable sea, impenetrable, with no trace of his passage. Perhaps he was already in the heart of the mine field, and a misstep could destroy him: he might as well go forward.

This damned land, he thought. Damned right to the end.

If only he had a dog, a big dog, heavy as a man, to send ahead. Instinctively, he clicked his tongue, as if urging a dog to run. I have to be my own dog, he thought.

Maybe a stone would do. There was one near him: big, but he could lift it. It was just right. He grabbed it with both hands and flung it ahead of himself as far as he could throw, uphill. The stone fell not far away and rolled back toward him. He could only try his luck, as he was doing.

He was already in the higher part of the gap, among the treacherous dry, rocky stream beds. The colonies of marmots had heard the man and were in a state of alarm. Their screams pierced the air like cactus spines.

But the man no longer thought of hunting the animals. He had realized that the gap, broad at its mouth, had gradually narrowed and now was only a passage between cliffs and brush. Then the man understood: the mine field could only be here. This was the only spot where a certain number of mines, placed at the correct interval, could block all passing. Instead of terrifying him, this discovery gave him a strange serenity. Very well: he now found himself in the middle of the mine field, that was sure. Now there was nothing to do but continue climbing, at random, and let what would happen, happen. If it was his fate to die that day, he would die; if not, he would walk between one mine and the next and would be saved.

He formulated this thought about fate without any con-



* * *



viction: he did not believe in fate. If he took a step it was because he could not do otherwise; it was because the movement of his muscles, the course of his thoughts led him to take that step. But there was a moment when he could take this step or that one, when his thoughts were in doubt, his muscles taut but without direction. He decided not to think, to let his legs move like a robot's, to set his feet on the stones without looking; but he had the nagging suspicion that it was his volition that decided whether he would turn right or left, place his foot on this stone or that.

He stopped. He felt a strange inner craving, compounded of hunger and fear, which he could not allay. He searched his pockets: he was carrying a little mirror, the memento of a woman. Maybe this was what he wanted: to look at himself in a mirror. In the little piece of murky glass an eye appeared, red and swollen, then a cheek, the beard caked with dust, then his parched, chapped lips, his gums redder than the lips, then the teeth. ... Still, the man would have liked to see himself in a big mirror, see himself whole. To run that little piece of mirror over his face and see an eye, an ear did not satisfy him.

He went on. I haven't encountered the mine field so far, he thought. By now it must be another fifty paces, forty. ...

Every time he set his foot down, feeling the ground beneath him hard and steady, he heaved a sigh. One step is taken, another, and another. This slab of marl seemed a trap, but, no, it's firm; this clump of heather isn't concealing anything; this stone ... the stone sank two inches beneath his weight. "Gheee ... gheee ..." went the marmots. Go ahead: the other foot.

The earth became sun, the air became earth, the "gheee" of



* * *



the marmots became thunder. The man felt an iron hand grasp him by the hair, at the nape. Not one hand, a hundred hands seized him, each by the hair, and tore him head to foot, the way you tear up a sheet of paper, into hundreds of little pieces.



* * *



POSTWAR STORIES



* * *



THEFT IN A PASTRY SHOP

When Dritto got to the place where they were to meet, the others had already been waiting some time. There were two of them, Baby and Uora-Uora. The street was so silent that the ticking of the clocks in the houses could be heard. With two jobs to do, they'd have to hurry to get through them by dawn.

"Come on," said Dritto.

"Where to?" they asked.

But Dritto was never one to explain about any job he was going to do.

"Come on now," he replied. And he walked along in silence, through streets empty as dry rivers, with the moon following them along the tramlines, Dritto ahead, gazing around with those restless yellow eyes of his, his nostrils moving as if they were smelling something peculiar.

Baby was called that because he had a big head like a newborn baby and a stumpy body; also perhaps because of his short hair and pretty little face with its small black mustache. All muscle, he moved so softly he might have been a cat; there



* * *



was no one like him at climbing up walls and squeezing through openings, and Dritto always had good reason to take him along.

"Will it be a good job, Dritto?" asked Baby.

"If we bring it off," answered Dritto—a reply that didn't mean much.

Meanwhile, by a devious route that only he knew, he had led them around a corner into a yard. The other two soon realized that they were going to work on the back of a shop, and Uora-Uora pushed ahead in case he was left as lookout. It always fell to Uora-Uora to be lookout man; he longed to break into houses, search around, and fill his pockets like the others, but he always found himself standing guard on cold streets, in danger from police patrols, his teeth chattering in the cold, and chain-smoking to calm his nerves. Uora-Uora was an emaciated Sicilian, with a sad mulatto face and wrists jutting out of his sleeves. When on a job he always dressed up in his best, God knows why, complete with hat, tie, and raincoat, and if forced to run for it, he'd snatch up the ends of his raincoat as if spreading wings.

"You're lookout, Uora-Uora," said Dritto, dilating his nostrils. Uora-Uora took off quietly; he knew Dritto and the danger signal of those dilating nostrils, which would move quicker and quicker until they suddenly stopped and he whipped out a revolver.

"There," Dritto said to Baby. He pointed to a little window high off the ground, a piece of cardboard in place of a broken pane.

"You climb up, get in, and open for me," he said. "Be sure not to put on the lights: they'll be seen from outside."

Baby pulled himself up on the smooth wall like a monkey,



* * *



pushed in the cardboard without a sound, and stuck his head through. It was then that he became aware of the smell; he took a deep breath and up through his nostrils wafted an aroma of freshly baked cakes. It gave him a feeling of shy excitement, of remote tenderness, rather than of actual greed.

Oh, what a lot of cakes there must be in here, he thought. It was years since he had eaten a proper piece of cake, not since before the war perhaps. He decided to search around till he found them. He jumped down into the darkness, kicked against a telephone, got a broomstick up his trouser leg, and then hit the ground. The smell of cakes was stronger than ever, but he couldn't tell where it was coming from.

Yes, there must be a lot of cakes in here, thought Baby.

He reached out a hand, trying to feel his way in the dark, so he could reach the door and open it for Dritto. Quickly he recoiled in horror; he must be face to face with some animal, some soft slimy sea-thing, perhaps. He stood there with his hand in the iar, a hand that had suddenly become damp and sticky, as if covered with leprosy. Between the fingers had sprouted something round and soft, an excrescence, maybe a tumor. He strained his eyes in the dark but could see nothing, not even when he put his hand under his nose. But he could smell, even though he could not see; and he burst out laughing. He realized he had touched a tart and was holding a blob of cream and a crystallized cherry.

At once he began licking the hand, and groping around with the other at the same time. It touched something solid but soft, with a thin covering of fine sugar—a doughnut! Still groping, he popped the whole of it into his mouth and gave a little cry of pleasure on discovering it had jam inside. This really was the most wonderful place; whatever way he



* * *



stretched out his hand in the dark, it found new kinds of cakes.

Suddenly he became aware of an impatient knocking on a door nearby; it was Dritto waiting to be let in. As Baby moved toward the sound, his hands bumped first into a meringue and then into an almond cake. He opened the door and Dritto's flashlight lit up his little face, its mustache already white with cream.

"It's full of cakes here!" exclaimed Baby, as if the other did not know.

"There isn't time for cakes," said Dritto, pushing him aside. "We've got to hurry." And he went ahead, twisting the beam of his flashlight around in the dark. Everywhere it touched it lit up rows of shelves, and on the shelves rows of trays, and on the trays rows of cakes of every conceivable shape and color, tarts filled with cream that glittered like candle wax, piles of sugar-coated buns, and castles of almond cakes.

It was then that a terrible worry came over Baby, the worry of not having time to eat all he wanted, of being forced to make his escape before he had sampled all the different kinds of cakes, of having all this land of milk and honey at his disposal for only a few minutes in his whole life. And the more cakes he discovered, the more his anxiety increased, so that every new corner and every fresh view of the shop that was lit up by Dritto's flashlight seemed to be about to shut him off.

He flung himself at the shelves, choking himself with cakes, cramming two or three inside his mouth at a time, without even tasting them; he seemed to be battling with the cakes, as if they were threatening enemies, strange monsters besieging him, a crisp and sticky siege which he must break through



* * *



by the force of his jaw. The slit halves of the big sugared buns seemed to be opening yellow throats and eyes at him, the cream horns to be blossoming like flowers of carnivorous plants; for a horrible moment Baby had the feeling that it was he who was being devoured by the cakes.

Dritto pulled him by the arm. "The till," he said. "We've got to open the till."

At the same time, as he passed, he stuffed a piece of multicolored spongecake into his mouth, a cherry off a tart, and then a brioche—hurriedly, as if anxious not to be distracted from the job at hand. He had switched off his flashlight.

"From outside they could see us clearly," he said.

They had now reached the front of the pastry shop, with its showcases and marble countertops. Through the grilled shutters the lights from the street entered in streaks; outside they could see strange shadows on the trees and houses.

Now the moment had come to force the till.

"Hold this," said Dritto, handing the flashlight to Baby with the beam pointing downward so that it could not be seen from outside.

But Baby was holding the flashlight with one hand and groping around with the other. He seized an entire plum cake and, while Dritto was busy at the lock with his tools, began chewing it as if it were a loaf of bread. But he soon tired of it and left it half eaten on the marble slab.

"Get away from there! Look what a filthy mess you're making," hissed Dritto through clenched teeth; in spite of his trade he had a strange respect for tidy work. Then he couldn't resist the temptation, either, and stuffed two cakes, the kind that were half sponge and half chocolate, into his mouth, though without interrupting his work.



* * *



Baby, meanwhile, in order to have both hands free, had constructed a kind of lampshade from tray cloths and pieces of nougat. He then espied some large cakes with "Happy Birthday" written on them. He circled them, studying the plan of attack; first he reviewed them with a finger and licked off a bit of chocolate cream, then he buried his face inside and began biting them from the middle, one by one.

But he still felt a kind of frenzy, which he did not know how to satisfy; he could not discover any way of enjoying everything completely. Now he was crouching on all fours over a table laden with tarts; he would have liked to lie down in those tarts, cover himself with them, never have to leave them. But five or ten minutes from now it would be all over; for the rest of his life pastry shops would be out of bounds to him again, forever, like when he was a child squashing his nose against the windowpane. If only, at least, he could stay there three or four hours ...

"Dritto," he exclaimed, "suppose we hide here till dawn, who'll see us?"

"Don't be a fool," said Dritto, who had now succeeded in forcing the till and was searching around among the notes. "We've got to get out of here before the cops show up."

Just at that moment they heard a rap on the window. In the dim moonlight Uora-Uora could be seen knocking on the blind and making signs to them. The two in the shop gave a jump, but Uora-Uora motioned for them to keep calm and for Baby to come out and take his place, so that he could come in. The other two shook their fists and made faces at him and gestured for him to get away from the front of the shop if he didn't want his brains blown out.

Dritto, however, had found only a few thousand lire in the



* * *



till, and was cursing and blaming Baby for not trying to help him. But Baby seemed beside himself; he was biting into doughnuts, picking at raisins, licking syrups, plastering himself all over and leaving sticky marks on the showcases and counters. He found that he no longer had any desire for cakes—in fact a feeling of nausea was beginning to creep up from the pit of his stomach—but he refused to take it seriously, he simply could not give up yet. And the doughnuts began to turn into soggy pieces of spongecake, the tarts to flypaper, the cakes to asphalt. Now he saw only the corpses of cakes lying putrefying on their marble slabs, or felt them disintegrating like turgid glue inside his stomach.

Dritto, meanwhile, was cursing and swearing at the lock on another till, forgetful of cakes and hunger. Suddenly, from the back of the shop appeared Uora-Uora, swearing in his Sicilian dialect, which was quite unintelligible to either of them.

"The cops?" they asked, already pale.

"Change of guard! Change of guard!" Uora-Uora was croaking in his dialect, trying hard to explain how unjust it was to leave him starving out in the cold while they gorged themselves with cakes inside.

"Go back and keep watch, go and keep watch!" shouted Baby angrily, the nausea from having eaten too much making him feel savage and selfish.

Dritto knew that it was only fair to Uora-Uora to make the change, but he also knew that Baby would not be convinced so easily, and without someone on guard they couldn't stay. So he pulled out his revolver and pointed it at Uora-Uora.

"Back to your post right now, Uora-Uora," he said.

Desperately, Uora-Uora thought of getting some supplies



* * *



before leaving, and gathered in his big hands a small pile of little almond cakes with nuts.

"And suppose they catch you with your hands full of cakes, you fool, what'll you tell them?" Dritto swore at him. "Leave them all there and get out."

Uora-Uora burst into tears. Baby felt he hated him. He picked up a cake with "Happy Birthday" written on it and flung it in Uora-Uora's face. Uora-Uora could easily have avoided it, but instead he extended his face to get the full force, then burst out laughing, for his face, hat, and tie were all covered in cream cake. Off he went, licking himself right up to his nose and cheeks.

At last Dritto succeeded in forcing the till and was stuffing into his pocket all the notes he could find, cursing because they stuck to his jammy fingers.

"Come on, Baby, time to go," he said.

But Baby could not leave just like that; this was a feast to be talked over for years to come with his cronies and with Tuscan Mary. Tuscan Mary was Baby's girl friend; she had long smooth legs and a face and body that were almost horselike. Baby liked her because he could curl himself up and wind around her like a cat.

Uora-Uora's second entrance interrupted the course of these thoughts. Dritto quickly pulled out his revolver, but Uora-Uora shouted, "The cops!" and rushed off, flapping the ends of his raincoat. Dritto gathered up the last few notes and was at the door in a couple of leaps, with Baby behind.

Baby was still thinking of Tuscan Mary, and it was then that he remembered he might have taken some cakes for her; he never gave her presents and she might make a scene about it. He went back, snatched up some cream rolls, thrust them



* * *



under his shirt, then, quickly realizing that he had chosen the most fragile ones, looked around for some more solid things and stuffed those into his bosom, too. At that moment he saw the shadows of policemen moving on the window, waving their arms and pointing at something at the end of the street; one of them aimed a revolver in that direction and fired.

Baby squatted down behind a counter. The shot did not seem to have hit its target; now they were making angry gestures and peering inside the shop. Shortly afterward he heard them finding the little door open, and then coming in. Now the shop was teeming with armed policemen. Baby remained crouching there, but meanwhile he found some candied fruit within arm's reach and chewed at slivers of citron and ber-gamot to calm his nerves.

The police had now discovered the theft and also found the remains of half-eaten cakes on the shelves. And so, distractedly, they, too, began to nibble little cakes that were lying about— taking care, though, to leave the traces of the thieves. After a few moments, becoming more enthusiastic in their search for evidence, they were all eating away heartily.

Baby was chewing, but the others were chewing even more loudly and drowned out the sound. All of a sudden he felt a thick liquid oozing up from between his skin and his shirt, and a mounting nausea from his stomach. He was so dizzy with candied fruit that it was some time before he realized that the way to the door was free. Later the police described how they had seen a monkey, its nose plastered with cream, swing across the shop, overturning trays and tarts; and how, by the time that they had recovered from their amazement and cleared the tarts from under their feet, he had escaped.

When Baby got to Tuscan Mary's and opened his shirt, he



* * *



found his whole chest covered with a strange sticky paste. And they stayed till morning, he and she, lying on the bed, licking and picking at each other till they had finished the last crumb of cake and blob of cream.



* * *



DOLLARS AND THE DEMIMONDAINE

It was after supper and Emanuele was flicking a flyswatter against the windowpane. He was thirty-two years old and plump. His wife, Jolanda, was changing her stockings to go out.

Through the window could be seen the rubble patch where the old warehouse used to be; across it opened a view of the sea, between houses sloping downhill; the sea was darkening, and a slow wind was surging up through the streets. Six sailors from the Shenandoah, an American torpedo boat anchored outside the port, entered a tavern called The Tub of Diogenes.

"There are six Americans at Felice's," said Emanuele.

"Officers?" asked Jolanda.

"Sailors. Better. Hurry up." He pushed back his hat and twisted around, groping for the sleeve of his jacket.

Jolanda had fastened her garter and was now tucking in the straps of her brassière, which were sticking out in front.

"Ready? Let's go."

Because they trafficked in dollars, Emanuele and Jolanda wanted to ask the sailors if they had any to sell; they were a respectable pair, though, for all their trafficking.



* * *



On the deserted rubble patch an odd palm tree or two planted to improve the area were rustling in the wind, as if desolate and disconsolate. And in the middle of the patch stood the brightly lit construction called The Tub of Diogenes, put up by an ex-serviceman called Felice, with the Town Council's permission and in spite of protests that it spoiled the neighborhood. It was shaped like a barrel; inside were a bar and tables.

Emanuele turned to Jolanda. "Now, you go in first and start talking to them, and ask them if they'd like to change any dollars. They're more likely to say yes to you at once. Then I'll come in and clinch the deal."

A strategist, Emanuele. Off Jolanda went.

At Felice's the six sailors were lined along the bar from end to end, and all those white trousers and elbows leaning on the marble made it seem as if there were twelve of them. Jolanda approached and saw twelve eyes fixed on her, rotating in rhythm with closed, chewing, grunting mouths. Most of them, in loose white tunics and with those caps perched on their heads, looked overgrown yet badly developed; but there was one near her, over six feet tall, with apple cheeks and a neck like a pyramid, whose uniform molded him as if he were naked; he had round eyes with pupils that turned all around without ever touching the rims. Jolanda hid a strap on her brassière that kept popping out.

From behind the bar, Felice, a chef's hat perched above swollen, sleepy eyes, was busy refilling glasses and seeing that all went well. From his cobbler's face, its chin perpetually dark in spite of shaving, came a grin of greeting. He spoke English, Felice did, and Jolanda whispered, "Felice, will you just ask them if they want to change any dollars?"

Felice, forever grinning and evasive, replied, "Ask 'em



* * *



yourself," and told a young waiter with tar-black hair and an onion-shaped face to bring out more trays of pizza and fried potatoes.

Jolanda was now surrounded by those long white chewing figures, exchanging inhuman grunts as they watched her.

"Please," she said in English, gesticulating. "Me to you lire, you to me dollars?"

They went on chewing. The big one with the bull neck smiled; he had the whitest teeth, so white that no gaps showed between.

A broad, short sailor, with a face as dark as a Spaniard's, now came toward her.

"Me to you dollars," he said in Italian, also gesticulating. "You to me bed."

Then he repeated it all in English, and the others gave long muffled laughs, still chewing and keeping their eyes fixed upon her.

Jolanda turned toward Felice. "Felice," she said, "explain to them."

"Whisky and soda," said Felice in his peculiar English, rolling some glasses on the marble top of the bar. His grin would have been nasty if he had not sounded so sleepy.

The giant sailor spoke; his voice rang out like an iron ring on a buoy buffeted by waves. He ordered Jolanda a drink, then took the glass from Felice's hand and held it out to her; it seemed incredible that the fragile stem of the glass didn't break in those huge fingers.

Jolanda did not know what to do. "Me lire, you dollars," she repeated.

But the others had already learned Italian. "You bed," they cried. "Bed, dollars."

At this moment, in came the husband, to see the circle of



* * *



restless backs and hear his wife's voice coming from somewhere in the midst of them. He went up to the bar. "Hey, Felice, tell me, will you ..." he began.

"What can I get you?" asked Felice with his tired grin. His chin, shaved only two hours earlier, was already getting stubbly.

Emanuele tipped his hat back from his sweating forehead and began making little jumps to try to see over the wall of backs.

"My wife—what's she doing?"

Felice climbed on a bench, stuck out his chin, then jumped down.

"She's still in there," he replied.

Emanuele loosened the knot of his tie a little to breathe more freely.

"Tell her to come out," he said.

But Felice was busy scolding the onion-faced boy for leaving dishes without fried potatoes on them.

"Jolanda?" called her husband, and tried to push in between two Americans; he got a dig on the chin and another in the stomach, and was soon out, jumping up and down around the group again. From the thick of it all a rather tremulous little voice replied, "Emanuele?"

He shouted back, "How's it going? ..."

"It looks," said her voice, as if she were talking on the telephone, "it looks as if they don't want lire. ..."

He kept his calm, but started drumming on the counter. "They don't?" he cried. "Then come on out."

"Coming," she replied, and tried to make a little dive through that hedge of men. But there was something holding her back; she glanced down and saw a big hand placed against





* * *



her, a big, strong, gentle hand. Before her was standing the giant with the apple cheeks, his teeth gleaming like the whites of his eyes.

"Please ..." she begged softly, trying to loosen his hand, and called out to Emanuele, "Just coming..." Instead she stayed there in the middle of them.

"Please," she kept on repeating. "Please."

Felice put a glass under Emanuele's nose.

"What can I get you?" he asked, lowering his head in its chef's hat and leaning on the bar, his ten fingers splayed out.

Emanuele was staring into space. "Wait ... I've got an idea. ... Wait," he said and left.

Outside, the street lamps were already lit. Emanuele ran across the street, went into the Café Lamarmora and looked all around. Only the regulars were there, playing cards. "Come and join us, Manuele," they called out. "What's up, Manuele?" But he had already hurried out; he ran on without stopping till he reached the Paris Bar. There he made a round of the tables, beating a fist against the palm of his hand. Finally he whispered in the bartender's ear. The man said, "Not here yet—later tonight, maybe." Emanuele hurried out. The bartender burst out laughing and went over to tell the cashier.

At Giglio's La Bolognese, the old tart from Bologna had hardly stretched out her legs under the table—her varicose veins were beginning to hurt—when Emanuele arrived, with his cap on the back of his head, panting so hard she could not understand what he wanted.

"Come on," he cried, pulling her by the hand. "Come on, quick, it's urgent."

"Manuelino, kid, what's up with you?" asked La Bolognese,



* * *



opening wide eyes surrounded by latticed wrinkles under a black fringe. "After all these years. ... What is up with you, sweetie?"

But he was already pulling her along by the hand, and she was hobbling behind, her swollen legs hampered by the tight petticoat halfway up her thighs.

In front of the movie theater they ran into Mad Maria accosting a corporal.

"Hey, you come along, too. I'll take you to some Ameri-cans.

Mad Maria did not need telling twice; she left the corporal with the flick of a finger and started running along beside Emanuele, her red hair flying in the wind and her eyes piercing the darkness with anticipation.

The situation had not changed much in The Tub of Diogenes. There were several empty bottles on Felice's shelf, the gin had all gone, and the pizzas just being finished. The two women bustled in, Emanuele urging them along from behind; when the sailors found them suddenly pushed into their midst, they shouted cries of greeting. Exhausted, Emanuele slumped onto a stool. Felice poured him out a stiff drink. One of the sailors broke away from the group and came and slapped Emanuele on the back, while the others gave friendly glances in his direction. Felice began telling them something about Emanuele.

"Well," asked Emanuele. "How am I doing?"

Felice gave his eternally sleepy grin.

"Oh, you'll need at least six. ..."

Things were not improving, in fact; Mad Maria was hanging around the neck of a lanky sailor with a face like a fetus, and squirming in her green dress like a snake trying to change



* * *



its skin; La Bolognese had the short Spaniard buried in her bosom and was cosseting him in a motherly way.

But Jolanda did not appear. That enormous back, always in front, prevented anyone from seeing her. Emanuele made nervous signs to Mad Maria and La Bolognese to keep moving around, but they seemed oblivious of everything.

"Oooh..." said Felice, glancing over Emanuele's shoulders.

"What's that for?" Emanuele asked, but the bartender was busy scolding the boy for not drying the glasses quickly enough. Emanuele turned around and saw more sailors arriving. There must have been fifteen of them. The Tub of Diogenes was soon full of drunken sailors. Mad Maria and La Bolognese flung themselves into the middle of the melee— Maria jumping from one sailor's neck to the other, swirling her monkey legs in the air, and the other, with a constant false smile painted in lipstick, gathering the lost ones to her breast like a broody hen.

Once Emanuele caught a sudden glimpse of Jolanda milling about in the midst of it all; then she vanished again. Every now and then Jolanda felt she was going to be trampled underfoot by the crowd around her, but each time she found beside her the giant sailor with the flashing white teeth and eyes, and each time she felt safe without knowing why. Moving gently, the man always kept beside her; his big body in its tight white uniform must have had muscles as smooth as a cat's; his chest rose and fell slowly, as if full of the great air of the sea. Suddenly that voice of his, booming like a buoy, began producing words one by one in a peculiar rhythm; he burst out into song, and they all began swaying and turning as if to a dance band.

Meanwhile, Mad Maria, who knew every corner of the



* * *



place, was pushing and kicking her way toward a small door at the back of the bar, arm in arm with a sailor who had a mustache. At first Felice did not want this door to be opened, but the whole mass of them were pushing behind and finally rammed it in.

Emanuele, crouching on top of his stool, was following the scene with misty eyes.

"What's in there, Felice? What's in there?" But Felice did not reply; he was worrying because there was nothing more to eat or drink.

"Go to Valkyria's and ask 'em to lend us something to drink," he said to the onion-faced boy. "Anything, even beer. And cakes. Hurry, now."

While this was happening, Jolanda had been pushed through the little door. Inside was a small room, curtained and clean, containing a bed all made up with a blue coverlet, a wash basin, and so forth. The giant began to turn the others out of the room, calmly and firmly, pushing at them with his big hands, and keeping Jolanda behind his shoulders. But for some reason or other all the sailors wanted to stay in the little room, and for each wave that the giant sailor repulsed another wave returned—lessening each time, though, as some tired and stayed outside. Jolanda was pleased that the giant was doing this, because she was able to breathe more freely and also hide the straps that kept popping out of her brassière.

Emanuele was watching it all: he saw the giant's hands pushing the others out of the door, and his wife vanishing so that she must certainly be inside, and the other sailors returning again and again, in waves, with one or two less in each wave, first ten, then nine, then seven. How many minutes would it take the giant to succeed in shutting the door?



* * *



Then Emanuele hurried outside again. He crossed the square in hops, as if in a sack race. There was a line of taxis in the rank with all the drivers asleep. He went from one to another, waking them and explaining what he wanted them to do, furious when they didn't understand. One by one the taxis drove off in different directions. Emanuele went off in a taxi, too, standing on the running board.

The noise woke Baci, the old cabman on top of his box, and he hurried down to see if there was any fare to take. He quickly grasped the situation, like the old hand at the job he was, clambered back on his box, and woke up his old horse. When Baci's cab had gone creaking off, the square was left deserted and silent, save for the noise coming from The Tub of Diogenes in the middle of the rubble patch.

At Iris's the girls were all dancing; they were very young, with budlike mouths and tight jerseys molding their jutting breasts. Emanuele was in too much of a hurry to wait till the dance ended. "Hey, you," he called to a girl dancing with her back pressed against a man whose hands were around her. The man turned toward Emanuele; he was a porter with hair low on his forehead and an open shirt. "What d'you want?" he exclaimed. Another three or four stopped around him: boxers' faces, breathing hard through their noses. "Let's get out," muttered Emanuele's driver, "or there'll be another row here, too."

They went off to the Panther's place: but she didn't want to open up since she already had a client. "Dollars," shouted Emanuele, "dollars." She opened then, wrapped in a dressing gown, looking like an allegorical statue. They dragged her down the stairs and pushed her into the taxi. Then they picked up Babilla walking along the sea front with her dog on a



* * *



leash, Belbambin at the Traveler's Café with her fox fur around her neck, and Bekuana at the Hotel Pace with her ivory cigarette holder. At the Ninfea they discovered the proprietress had three new girls, who were giggling away and thought they were being taken for a ride in the country. They were all loaded in. Emanuele was sitting in front, rather overcome by the uproar made by all those women crushed in at the back; the tax driver was only worrying if the springs would hold.

Suddenly a figure ran into the middle of the road as if wanting to be run over. He signed for them to stop; it was the onion-faced boy, laden with a crate of beer and a tray of cakes, wanting a lift. The door flew open and with a gasp the boy vanished inside, beer, cakes, and all. Off the taxi started again. Passers-by stopped and stared after this taxi racing along as if it were going to an emergency room, with those screams and high voices coming from inside. Every now and again Emanuele heard a long squeak and said to the driver, "Something's broken—can't you hear that noise?"

The driver shook his head. "It's the boy," he said. Emanuele wiped the sweat from his brow.

When the taxi pulled up in front of the Tub, the boy jumped out first, holding the tray above his head and the crate under his other arm. His hair was standing on end, his eyes were open so wide they took up half his face, and he hopped away like a monkey.

"Felice," he cried, "everything's safe! I didn't let them take a thing! But, oh, if you knew what they did to me, Felice!"

Jolanda was still inside the little room, and the giant was still busy pushing sailors away from the door. But by now there was only one left who insisted on trying to get in; com-



* * *



pletely drunk, he kept bouncing back on the giant's hands. When the new arrivals made their entry, Felice, wearily surveying the scene from the top of a stool, saw the sea of white caps part and a plumed hat, a shoulder covered in black silk, a fat haunch like a pig's, a breast draped with artificial flowers, swirling up to the surface and vanishing again like bubbles of air.

There was a sound of brakes outside, and four, five, six— an entire line of taxis arrived; from every taxi emerged women. There was the Wriggler, with her ladylike hair style, advancing majestically, screwing up her shortsighted eyes; there was Spanish Carmen, swathed in veils, her face hollow as a skull, twisting her bony hips like a cat; there was old Lame Joan, hobbling on her little Chinese umbrella; there was the Black Girl of Long Alley with her black-woman's hair and furry legs; there was the Mouse, in a dress covered with the designs of cigarette brands; there was Milena the drug addict, in a dress patterned with playing cards; there was Lollypop, with her face covered with spots; and Inés the Femme Fatale, in an all-lace gown.

Wheels could be heard crunching on the gravel: it was Baci's old cab with the horse half dead; when he stopped, a woman jumped out of there, too. She had a full velvet skirt trimmed with bows and lace, a bosom roped in necklaces, a black band around her throat, dangling earrings, a lorgnette, and blond wig topped by a big romantic hat decorated with artificial roses and grapes and clouds of ostrich feathers.

More waves of sailors had arrived at The Tub of Diogenes. One was playing an accordion and another a saxophone, and women were dancing on the tables. Despite Emanuele's efforts, there were still many more sailors than women, yet no one



* * *



could reach a hand out without touching a bosom or a thigh that seemed to have got lost, since it was impossible to tell who it belonged to; there were legs in mid-air and bosoms knee-high. Velvety hands, creeping claws, sharply pointed red nails, quivering fingertips, were groping at tunics, caressing muscles, tickling arms. And mouths met, almost flying through the air, and clung behind ears like clams; huge lips seemed coated with scarlet almost up to the nostrils. Innumerable legs were squirming everywhere, like the tentacles of some enormous octopus, legs sliding about and colliding with haunches and thighs. Then everything seemed to melt away in the sailors' hands, and they found themselves holding a hat trimmed with bunches of grapes, or a dental plate, or a stocking wrapped around the neck, or a sponge, or a piece of silk trimming.

Jolanda had remained alone in the little room with the giant sailor. The door was locked and she was combing her hair in front of the mirror over the wash basin. The giant went to the window and opened the curtains. Outside could be seen the dark naval area and the mole with a line of lights reflected in the water. Then the giant began singing an American song that went, "The day is over, the night is falling, the skies are blue, the bells are beginning to ring."

Jolanda approached the window, too, and gazed out into the darkness; their hands met on the window sill and remained there motionless beside each other. The big sailor went on singing in his voice of iron, "Children of God, let us sing Hallelujah!"

And Jolanda repeated: "Let us sing Hallelujah, Hallelujah!"

During all this time Emanuele was anxiously moving



* * *



around among the sailors without finding a sign of his wife, pushing away the bodies of excited women who every now and then fell into his arms. Suddenly, he was confronted by the group of taxi drivers, who had pushed in to get him to pay the fares shown on their meters. Emanuele's eyes were tearful, but the drivers weren't going to let him off without paying. Now they were joined by old Baci, who was cracking his big coachman's whip and muttering, "If you don't pay up, I'll take her away again!"

Then whistles shrilled and the bar was surrounded by military police. It was the patrol from the Shenandoah with rifles and helmets. They turned out all the sailors, one by one. Then the Italian police trucks arrived and loaded up all the women they could lay hands on.

The sailors were lined up outside the bar and marched off toward the port. When the police trucks laden with women passed them on their way, there was a great shout of greetings from both sides. The giant sailor, who was in the leading file, began singing in his resounding voice, "The day is over, the sun is setting, let us sing Hallelujah, Hallelujah!"

Jolanda, squeezed inside a truck between Lollypop and the Wriggler, heard his voice getting farther away and took up the song: "The day is over, the work is done—Hallelujah!"

And they all began singing the song, the sailors and the women, one group going toward the port, the other toward the police station.

At The Tub of Diogenes Felice was beginning to pile up the tables. But Emanuele sat there slumped on a stool, his chin on his chest and his hat on the back of his head. They had been about to arrest him, too, but the American officer in charge of operations had made some inquiries and gestured



* * *



for him to be left alone. And now he, the officer, had also stayed on, and there were only the two of them left in the bar, Emanuele drooping desolately on his stool and the American standing in front of him with his arms crossed. When he was certain that they were quite alone, the officer shook the plump man by an arm and began talking to him. Felice approached to act as interpreter, a broad grin on his stubbly cobbler's face.

"Tell him that you can get him a girl, too," he said to Emanuele.

Emanuele blinked his eyes, then let his chin fall on his chest again.

"You to me, girl," said the officer. "Me to you, dollars."

"Dollars! ..." Emanuele mopped his face with his handkerchief. He got up. "Dollars," he repeated. "Dollars."

He and the officer left the bar together. Night clouds were flying high in the sky. From the end of the mole the lighthouse was winking slowly, rhythmically. The air was still full of the song: "Hallelujah!"

"The day is ending, the skies are blue, Hallelujah!" sang Emanuele and the officer, as they strolled along in the middle of the street, arm in arm, in search of a haunt for an all-night spree.



* * *



SLEEPING LIKE DOGS

Every time he opened his eyes he felt the acid yellow light of the big arc lamps in the ticket office glaring down at him; and he would pull up the lapels of his jacket in search of darkness and warmth. When he'd lain down he had not noticed how hard and icy the stone tiles on the floor were; now shafts of cold were infiltrating, coming up under his clothes and through the holes in his shoes, and the scarce flesh on his hips was aching, squashed between bone and stone.

But he'd chosen a good place, quiet and out of people's way, in that corner under the stairs; so much so that after he'd been there a little time four women's legs came high over his head and he heard voices say, "Hey, he's taken our place."

The man lying down heard, though he was not properly awake; a dribble was oozing from a corner of his mouth onto the bent cardboard of the little suitcase that was his pillow, and his hair had settled itself to sleep on its own, following the horizontal line of his body.

"Well," said the same voice from above the dirty knees and the spreading bell of the skirt, "let's put our things down. At least we can get our bed ready."

And one of those feet, a woman's in a boot, prodded his



* * *



hips like a sniffling snout. The man pulled himself up on his elbows, blinking his stunned and aching pupils in the yellow light, while his hair, apparently taking no notice, stood straight up on its own. Then back he dropped, as if he wanted to thump his head into the suitcase.

The women had taken the sacks off their heads. A man now came up behind, put down a roll of blankets, and began to arrange them. "Hey, you," said the older of the women to the man lying down, "move up, you can get underneath, too, then." No answer; he was asleep.

"He must be dead tired," said the younger of the two women, who was all bones, with the fleshy parts almost hanging as she bent down to spread the blankets and prop the sacks of flour underneath.

They were three black marketeers, on their way south with full sacks and empty tins; people whose bones had grown hard from sleeping on the floor in railroad stations and traveling in cattle cars; but they had learned to organize themselves and took blankets with them, to put underneath for softness and above for warmth; the sacks and tins acted as pillows.

The older woman tried to slip a corner of blanket under the sleeping man, but had to raise him a bit at a time because he never moved. "He must really be dead tired," said the older woman. "Maybe he's one of those emigrants."

Meanwhile, the man with them, a thin man, had got between two of the blankets and pulled an end over his eyes. "Hey, come down here; aren't you ready?" he said to the back of the younger woman, who was still bending down arranging the sacks as pillows. The younger woman was his wife, but they knew the floors of station waiting rooms almost better than their marriage bed. The two women got underneath the



* * *



blankets, and the younger one and her husband lay against each other making shivering noises, while the older one was tucking up that poor sleeping wretch. Perhaps the older one was not so old, but she was trodden down by the life she led, always lugging loads of flour and oil on her head up and down in those trains; even her dress was like a sack, and her hair went in all directions.

The head of the sleeping man was slipping off the suitcase, which was too high and wrenched his neck; she tried to arrange him better, but his head nearly fell on the ground; so she propped his head on one of her shoulders and the man shut his lips, swallowed, settled farther down on a softer part, and began snoring again.

They were all just getting off to sleep when a trio from southern Italy arrived, a father with a black mustache and two dark, plump daughters, all three very short; they were carrying wattle baskets and their eyes were gummed with sleep under all that light. The daughters seemed to be wanting to go in one direction and the father in another; so they were quarreling, without looking one another in the face and almost without talking, except for short phrases between clenched teeth and jerky arm movements. When they found the place under the stairs already occupied by those four, they stood looking on, more stunned than ever, until two youths in puttees with coats slung over their shoulders came up to them.

These two at once began trying to persuade the trio of southerners to put all their blankets together and make up one group with the four already there. The two youths were Venetians emigrating to France, and they made the black-market group get up and rearrange all the blankets so that the



* * *



whole bunch could settle down together. It was obvious that all this was just a maneuver to get near the two girls, already half asleep; but finally they were all settled, including the older of the black-market women, who had not moved because she had that man's head sleeping on her breast. The two Venetians had, of course, got the girls in between them, leaving the father on one side; but their hands also succeeded in reaching the other women by groping about under the blankets and coats.

Someone was already snoring, but the father from southern Italy could not manage to doze off in spite of all the sleep weighing on him. The acid yellow light burrowed right under his lids, under the hand covering his eyes; and the inhuman calls of the loudspeakers—"Slow train ... platform ... leaving ..."—kept him in a state of continual restlessness. He needed to urinate, too, but did not know where to go and was afraid of getting lost in that huge station. Finally he decided to wake one of the men and began shaking him; it was the unfortunate man who had been sleeping there first of all.

"The latrine, friend, the latrine," he said and pulled him by an elbow, sitting up in the middle of that heap of wrapped-up bodies.

The sleeping man suddenly sat up with a start and opened his misty red eyes and rubbery mouth at that face bending over him; a little wrinkled face, like a cat's, with a black mustache.

"The latrine, friend," said the southerner.

The other sat there stunned, glancing around in alarm. They both kept looking at each other open-mouthed, he and the man from southern Italy. The man still half asleep could not understand anything; he found that woman's face on the



* * *



floor beside him and gazed at it terror-struck. He may have been about to let out a shriek, but then, suddenly, he buried his head in the woman's breast again and dropped back to sleep.

The man from southern Italy got up, overturning two or three bodies, and began moving with uncertain steps along that huge, glaringly bright and cold hall. Through the windows could be seen the limpid darkness of the night and a view of geometric iron girders. He saw a dark little man, even shorter than himself, wearing a flashy crumpled suit, come up to him with a careless air.

"The latrine, friend," the man from southern Italy asked him imploringly.

"Cigarettes, American, Swiss," answered the other, who hadn't understood, showing the corner of a pack.

It was Belmoretto, who spent the whole year hanging around stations and had no home or even a bed on the face of the earth, and who every now and again took a train and changed cities, wherever his uncertain trafficking in cigarettes and chewing tobacco took him. At night he ended up joining with some group sleeping in the station between trains, and so managed to lie down for an hour or two under a blanket; if not he wandered around till morning, unless he happened to run into someone who would take him home and give him a bath and some food and make him sleep with him. Belmoretto came from southern Italy, too; he was very kind to the old man with the black mustache; he took him to the latrine and waited till he had finished, so as to accompany him back. He gave him a cigarette and they smoked together, looking through eyes sandy with sleep at the trains leaving and the mounds of people sleeping on the floor down in the hall below.



* * *



"We sleep like dogs," said the old man. "Six days and six nights since I've seen a bed."

"A bed," said Belmoretto. "Sometimes I dream of it, a bed. A lovely white bed all to myself."

The old man went back to try to get some sleep. When he raised a blanket to make room for himself, he saw the hand of one of the Venetians on the leg of one of his daughters. He tried to pull the hand away, but the Venetian thought it was his friend trying to have a taste, too, and pushed him. The old man cursed and raised his fist over him. But the others shouted that they could not sleep, and the old man eventually climbed back to his place on his knees and got under the blankets, quietly. He felt cold and curled himself up. A longing to cry came over him. Then, very cautiously, he advanced his hand among the nearest bodies and met two women's knees, which he began to stroke.

The older of the black-market women still had resting on her breast the face of the man who looked as if he had been squashed down by tons of sleep; whenever she touched him there was no reaction, only slight signs here and there of partial reawakening. Now the woman felt a hand, a small hand all lines and calluses, on her knee, and she squeezed her legs around the hand, which stopped and was quiet at once. The old man from southern Italy could not manage to sleep but he felt happier; the soft warmth in which his little hand was wrapped seemed to be diffusing itself all over his body.

At that moment all of them felt a strange creature moving in among them, as if a dog were scooping among the blankets. One of the women screamed. The blankets were hurriedly pulled away so they could find out what it was. And in the middle of them they discovered Belmoretto, who was already



* * *



snoring, his shoes off, twisted up like a fetus. He was woken by thumps on the back. "Excuse me," he said. "I didn't want to disturb you."

But now they were all awake and cursing, except for the first man, who was dribbling.

"My bones are breaking, my back's freezing," they were saying. "We ought to bust up that light and cut the cord of that loud-speaker."

"I'll show you how to make up a mattress, if you like," said Belmoretto.

"Mattress!" repeated the others. "Mattress!"

But Belmoretto had already cleared a bit of blanket and begun to fold it up into pleats, in the way anyone who's been in prison knows. They told him to stop : there weren't enough blankets and someone would find himself without any at all. Then they discussed how one couldn't sleep without something under one's head and not all of them had anything, as the southerners' baskets weren't any use. So Belmoretto arranged a complete system, by which every man rested his head on the leg of a woman; this was very difficult to do because of the blankets, but finally they were all arranged and a lot of new combinations resulted. A little while later, however, everything was in confusion again, because they could not keep still; then Belmoretto managed to sell everyone a Nazionale cigarette and they all began to smoke and tell one another how many nights it was since they'd slept.

"Three weeks we've been traveling," said the Venetians.

"Three times we've tried to pass this - frontier and

they've turned us back. In France we'll get into the first bed we see and sleep for forty-eight hours on end."

"A bed," said Belmoretto. "With newly washed sheets and



* * *



a feather mattress to sink into. A warm narrow bed, to be alone in."

"What about us, then, who've always led this life?" said the black-market man. "When we get home we spend a night in bed and then off we go on the trains again."

"A warm bed with clean sheets," said Belmoretto. "Naked, I'd get in all naked."

"Six nights since we've taken our clothes off," said the old southerner. "Since we've changed underclothes. Six nights we've been sleeping like dogs."

"I'd creep into a house like a thief," said one of the Venetians. "But not to steal. Just to get into a bed and sleep till morning."

"Or to steal a bed and bring it here to sleep in," said the other.

Belmoretto had an idea. "Wait," he said, and off he went.

He wandered around under the arches outside till he met Mad Maria. If Mad Maria spent a night without finding a client she had to go without a meal next day, so she never gave up, even in the small hours, and went on marching up and down those pavements till dawn, with his thick red hair and her muscular calves. Belmoretto was a great friend of hers.

In the encampment at the station they were still talking about sleep and beds and the dogs' lives they led, and waiting for the darkness to clear in the windows. Ten minutes had gone by when Belmoretto came back, with a rolled-up mattress on his shoulders.

"Down you go," he said, rolling it out on the floor. "Half an hour's turn for fifty lire; you can sleep two at a time. Come on, now, what's twenty-five lire a head?"

He had rented a mattress from Mad Maria, who had two



* * *



on her bed, and was now subletting it by the half hour. Other sleepy travelers who were waiting to change trains came up, looking interested.

"Down you go," said Belmoretto. "I'll take care of waking you. We'll put a blanket on top of you and then no one'll see you and you can do what you like. Down you go, now."

One of the Venetians tried first, together with one of the girls from southern Italy. The older of the black-market women booked the second shift for herself and that poor sleeping man she was still propping up. Belmoretto had already pulled out a notebook and was jotting down the bookings, pleased as could be.

At dawn he'd take the mattress back to Mad Maria and they'd turn somersaults all over the bed till high noon. Then, at last, they'd fall asleep.



* * *



DESIRE IN NOVEMBER

The cold hit the city one morning in November, under a deceitful sun in a clear calm sky; it cut like blades down the long straight streets, chasing the cats from the gutters back into kitchens with fires still unlit. People who had got up late and had not opened their windows went out in light overcoats, saying once again, "Winter's late this year," then suddenly shivered as they breathed the icy air. But then they thought of the coal and wood supplies laid in during summer and congratulated themselves on their own foresight.

It was a bad day for the poor, though; now they had to face problems they had so far put aside: heating, clothes. The public gardens were full of lanky young men eying the scraggy plane trees and eluding the keepers as they fingered the saws under their patched coats. A cluster of people were reading a notice about the distribution of winter vests and pants by a charitable organization.

In one of the parishes the poor were told to collect these garments from a local priest, Don Grillo. Don Grillo lived in an old house with dark narrow stairs, onto which the door of



* * *



his flat opened directly, with only a slip of landing. On these stairs the poor lined up on distribution days, to knock one by one on the closed door, hand their certificates and coupons to an aged and lacrimose housekeeper, and then wait on the stairs again for her to return with the meager bundle. There was a glimpse of a room inside, full of worm-eaten old furniture and a table covered with bundles, at which sat Don Grillo, looking enormous and shouting in his deep resounding voice as he jotted everything down in registers.

Sometimes the line wound down past the corners of the stairs: widows in reduced circumstances who seldom left their attics, beggars with hacking coughs, dusty countrymen stamping about in hobnailed boots, disheveled youths—emigrants from somewhere or other—who wore sandals in winter and raincoats in summer. Sometimes this slow and squalid stream spread right on down past the mezzanine floor and the glass doors of Fabrizia's, the furriers. And the elegant women going to Fabrizia's to have their mink or astrakhan altered had to hug the banisters to avoid brushing against the ragged crew.

On the day that flannel vests and pants were being distributed at Don Grillo's, the line was joined by a porter, a strong old man who had a white beard streaked with blond. He was wearing a military overcoat and nothing underneath at all. Buttoned and muffled up though he was, his shins were bare and ended in a pair of boots without any socks. People would look down and stand open-mouthed; he would laugh back. Under the fringe of white hair falling over his forehead he had two big, merry blue eyes, and a broad, vinous, happy face.

His name was Barbagallo and his clothes had been stolen from the riverbank that summer while he was carrying loads of gravel. Till then he had got along with a few rags and a



* * *



visit every now and then to prison or workhouse; but after a while he was let out of prison and escaped from the workhouse, to wander around the city and the villages nearby, loitering or doing an odd job as a porter by the hour here and there. Having no clothes was a good excuse for him to beg or to get put back in prison when he had nowhere better to go. The cold that morning had made him decide to lay hands on a suit, so he was going around naked except for that overcoat, terrifying the girls and being stopped by the police at every intersection as he was shuttled from one charity organization to another.

Once he joined the line, no one spoke of anything else; meanwhile, he was elbowing and pushing his way up the stairs, trying out every trick to get ahead.

"Yes, yes, I'm naked! D'you see? Not just my legs! Would you like me to unbutton my coat? Hey, either you let me pass or I will unbutton it! Am I cold? Never been better! Like to feel, madam, how warm I am? He's only handing out pants, the priest? What use are they to me? I'll take 'em, and then I'll go and sell 'em!"

Finally he sat down in the line, on a step that was actually the landing in front of Fabrizia's. Ladies were coming and going, showing off their furs for the first time. "Oh," they cried, when they saw the bare legs of the old man sitting down outside.

"Now, don't call the police, signora, they've already stopped me and sent me here to get myself some clothes. And anyway, I'm not showing anything, so don't make such a fuss."

The ladies passed hurriedly by, and Barbagallo felt himself brushed by the soft folds smelling of camphor and lily of the



* * *



valley. "A fine fur, signora, unquestionably; it must be nice and warm under that!"

As each woman passed, he stretched out his hand and stroked her fur. "Help," they screamed. Then he rubbed his cheek against the furs like a cat.

There was a confabulation inside Fabrizia's; no one dared come out any more. "Should we call the police?" they asked one another. "But they've sent him here to get clothes!" Every now and then they opened the door a crack. "Is he still there?" Once he stuck his bearded head in through the door, without getting up. "Oooh!" They nearly fainted.

Eventually Barbagallo made up his mind to go and parley with them. He got up and rang Fabrizia's bell. Two employees opened the door, one a pale woman who was all knees, the other a girl with black braids. "Call the ladies!" "Go away," said the pale woman. But Barbagallo did not let her shut the door. "Go and call 'em," he said to the other girl. She turned and went away. "Good girl," said Barbagallo. The owner of the shop appeared with her clients. "How much will you give me not to unbutton my coat?" said Barbagallo. "What?" "Come on, now, no nonsense!" And he began to unbutton himself from the neck with one hand, while holding the other out. The ladies hurriedly searched about in their bags for change to give him. One, a matron heavily loaded with jewels, did not seem to be able to find any change and was watching him with her big painted eyes. Barbagallo stopped unbuttoning. "Well, then; how much will you give me if I do unbutton?" "Ha ha ha!" exploded the salesgirl with the braids. "Linda!" shouted her mistress. Barbagallo pocketed the money and went out. "So long, Linda," he said.



* * *



In the line the rumor was going around that there weren't enough clothes for everyone.

"Me first, because I'm naked!" exclaimed Barbagallo and succeeded in getting to the head.

The housekeeper at the door clasped her hands together on seeing him. "With nothing underneath! What's to be done? Wait, no, don't come in!"

"Let me pass, old girl, or I'll tempt you to sin. Where is His Reverence?"

And he went into the priest's room, among the Sacred Hearts bleeding away in their baroque frames, the towering cupboards and the crucifixes splayed all over the walls like black birds. Don Grillo rose from his desk and burst into a loud laugh :

"Ho ho ho! And who got you up like that? Ho ho ho!"

"Tell me, Father, today is the day for flannel underclothes, but I'm here for trousers. Do you have any?"

The priest had flung himself back in his high-backed armchair and was laughing and laughing, his double chin and stomach in the air. "No, no, ho ho ho, no, I don't have any. ...

"I'm not asking for a pair of yours, you know. ... Well, in that case I'll have to stay here, till you telephone the bishop and have a pair sent over for me."

"That's it, that's it, my son, go to the archbishop's, go to the palace, ho ho ho, I'll give you a note. ..."

"A note. And what about the flannel underclothes?"

The priest began turning over sets of vests and long pants but could not find a size large enough for Barbagallo. When they had found the biggest pair there was, Barbagallo said,



* * *



"Now I'll put them on." The housekeeper was just in time to escape onto the landing before he took off his overcoat.

When he was naked, Barbagallo did a few exercises to warm himself up, then began to put on the underclothes. Don Grillo could not stop laughing at seeing that Garibaldi-like figure, squeezed from neck to wrists and down to the ankles into very tight vest and pants, with boots below.

"Oooh!" cried Barbagallo, and sprang back as if he had had a shock.

"What's the matter, what's the matter, my son?"

"It tickles, it tickles me everywhere. ... What's this vest you've given me, Father? I'm prickling all over!"

"Go on with you, it's new, you know, it's new; you'll soon get used to it."

"Oh, my skin's so delicate since I've got used to being naked. ... Oooh, how it pricks me!" And he twisted himself around to scratch his back.

"Come on, all you have to do is wash it once and it'll become as soft as silk. ... Now, go to the address I've given you and they'll see about getting you a suit. Off with you. ..." And he pushed Barbagallo toward the door, making him put on his overcoat again.

Barbagallo made no further resistance; he was a defeated man. They shut the door behind him. He started downstairs, doubled up, complaining and scratching himself, and all those still waiting in the line asked him, "What've they done to you? Did they hit you? What a scandal! A priest, hitting a poor old man! What lovely pants, though." And they looked at his shins encased in white flannel.



* * *



Barbagallo seemed to have aged about ten years; his blue eyes were swollen with tears. On his way downstairs, he passed by the door of the furriers. Suddenly he turned around, stopped his complaining, and knocked.

The salesgirl with the braids peeped out from the door. "But ..." she said. "Look," said Barbagallo with a smile on his still-tearful face, and pointed to the white pants at his ankles. And the girl exclaimed, "Oh ..."

He was inside now. "Call your mistress, go on!" The girl went out. Barbagallo leapt into a side room and locked himself in. Signora Fabrizia came, did not see him, and went back, shaking her head. "Why they don't keep madmen shut up, I don't know. ..."

As soon as the key had turned in the lock, Barbagallo tore off his overcoat, the vest, the boots, and the pants, and breathed freely, naked at last. Seeing himself reflected in a large mirror, he flexed his muscles and did some exercises. There was no heating and it was bitterly cold, but he felt very happy. Then he began to look around.

He had locked himself into Fabrizia's storeroom. Hung on a long clothes rack were all the furs in a row. The old man's eyes shone with joy. Furs! He began to pass his hands along them, from one to the other, as if playing a harp; then he rubbed his shoulder, his face in them. There was gray and sullen mink, astrakhan of voluptuous softness, silver foxes like grassy clouds, gray squirrels and stone martens exquisitely smooth and light, firm brown cozy beavers, good-natured and dignified rabbits, little white-speckled goats with a dry rustle, leopards with a shuddering caress. Barbagallo noticed that his teeth were chattering from the cold. He took a lamb's-wool jacket and tried it on; it fitted him like a glove. He tied a fox



* * *



fur around his hips, twisting the tawny tail to make a loincloth. Then he slipped into a sable coat that must have been made for an enormous woman, it wrapped him in such big soft folds. He also found a pair of boots lined with beaver, and then a beautiful bearskin hat; he was really comfortable Then a muff, and he was set. He preened himself in front of the mirror for a bit; it was impossible to distinguish what was beard and what was fur.

The clothes rack was still loaded with furs. Barbagallo flung them to the ground one by one until he had a wide soft bed under him to sink into. Then he stretched out and made all the rest of the furs cascade down on top of him like an avalanche. It was so warm that it seemed a pity to fall asleep and not enjoy just lying there, but the old porter could not hold out for long and soon sank into a serene and dreamless sleep.

When he woke up he saw night through the window. All around, silence. Obviously the fur shop was closed, and he wondered how he would ever get out. He listened and thought he heard a cough in the adjoining room. A light filtered through the keyhole.

Decked with mink, silver foxes, antelopes, and a bearskin hat, he got up and slowly opened the door. The girl with the black braids was sewing, bent over a table, by the light of a lamp. Because of the value of the goods in the storeroom, Signora Fabrizia made one of the girls stay and sleep in a bed in the workroom, to give the alarm in case of theft.

"Linda," said Barbagallo. The girl opened her eyes wide; there, standing in the shadow, she saw a gigantic human bear with its arms entwined in an astrakhan muff. "How lovely ..." she said.



* * *



Barbagallo took a few steps up and down, peacocking like a model.

Linda said, "But now I must call the police."

"The police!" Barbagallo was upset. "But I'm not stealing anything. What can I do with these things? Obviously I can't go around the streets like this. I only came in here to take off my vest, which was prickling me."

They arranged that he would stay the night there and leave early in the morning. What was more, Linda knew how to wash flannel so that it would stop tickling him, and she would wash his vest and pants for him.

Barbagallo helped her to wring them out and put up the line, then hang them near the electric fire. Linda had some apples, which they ate.

Then Barbagallo said, "Let's see how you look in these furs." And he made her try them all on, in all variations, with her braids up and with her hair loose, and they exchanged impressions on the softness of the various furs against the skin.

Finally, they constructed a hut entirely of furs, big enough for them both to lie under, and they went inside to sleep.

When Linda awoke he was already up and putting on the vest and pants. The dawn was showing through the window.

"Are they quite dry?"

"A little damp, but I must go."

"Do they still tickle?"

"Not a bit. I'm as comfortable as a pope."

He helped Linda straighten up the storeroom, put on his military overcoat, and said good-bye to her at the door.

Linda stood watching him as he walked away, with the white strip of pants between his overcoat and boots, and his proud tuft of hair in the cold dawn air.



* * *



Barbagallo had no intention of asking for a suit at the archbishop's palace; he had got a new idea—going around the squares of the surrounding villages in his vest and pants, giving exhibitions of physical prowess.



* * *



TRANSIT BED

The important thing was not to get himself arrested immediately. Gim flattened himself in the recess of a doorway; the police seemed to run straight past, but then, all at once, he heard their steps come back, turn into the alley. He darted off, in agile leaps.

"Stop or we'll shoot, Gim!"

Sure, sure, go ahead and shoot! he thought, and he was already out of their range, his feet thrusting him from the edge of the pebbled steps, down the slanting streets of the old city. Above the fountain, he jumped over the railing of the stairs; then he was under the archway, which amplified the pounding of his steps.

The whole circuit that came into his mind had to be rejected: Lola no, Nilde no, Renée no. Those guys would soon be all over the place, knocking at doors. It was a mild night, the clouds so pale they wouldn't have looked out of place in the daytime, above the arches set high over the alleyways.

On reaching the broad streets of the new city, Mario Albanesi, alias Gim Bolero, slowed his pace a little, tucked behind his ears the strings of hair that fell from his temples.



* * *



Not a step could be heard. Determined and discreet, he crossed over, reached Armanda's doorway, and climbed to her apartment. At this time of night she surely didn't have anybody with her; she would be sleeping. Gim knocked hard.

"Who's there?" a man's voice asked, irritated, after a moment. "At this time of night people get their sleep. ..." It was Lilin.

"Open up a minute, Armanda. It's me, it's Gim," he said, not loud, but firmly.

Armanda rolled over in bed. "Oh, Gim boy, just a minute, I'll open the door. ... Uh, it's Gim." She grabbed the cord at the head of the bed that opened the front door and pulled.

The door clicked, obedient; Gim went along the corridor, hands in his pockets; he entered the bedroom. In Armanda's huge bed, her body, in great mounds under the sheet, seemed to take up all the space. On the pillow, her face, without makeup under the black bangs, hung slack, baggy, and wrinkled. Beyond, as if in a fold of the blanket, on the far side of the bed, her husband, Lilin, was lying; he seemed to want to bury his little bluish face in the pillow, to recover his interrupted sleep.

Lilin has to wait till the last customer has gone before he can get into bed and sleep off the weariness that accumulates during his lazy days. There is nothing in the world that Lilin knows how to do or wants to do; if he has his smokes, he's content. Armanda can't say Lilin costs her much, except for the packs of tobacco he consumes in the course of a day. He goes out with his pack in the morning, sits for a while at the cobbler's, at the junk dealer's, at the plumber's, rolls one paper after another, and smokes, seated on those shop stools, his long, smooth, thief's hands on his knees, his gaze dull, listen-



* * *



ing like a spy to everyone, hardly ever contributing a word to the talk except for brief remarks and unexpected smiles, crooked and yellow. In the evening, when the last shop has closed, he goes to the wine counter and drains a bottle, burning up the cigarettes he has left, until they also pull down the shutters. He comes out; his wife is still on her beat along the Corso, in her short dress, her swollen feet in her tight shoes. Lilin appears around a corner, gives her a low whistle, mutters a few words to tell her it's late now, she should come to bed. Without looking at him, on the curb as if on a stage, her bosom compressed in the armature of wire and elastic, her old-woman's body in her young-girl's dress, nervously twitching her purse in her hands, drawing circles on the pavement with her heels, suddenly humming, she tells him no, people are still around, he must go off and wait. They woo each other like this every night.

"Well, then, Gim?" Armanda says, widening her eyes.

He has already found some cigarettes on the night table and lights one.

"I have to spend the night here. Tonight."

And he is already taking off his jacket, undoing his tie.

"Sure, Gim, get into bed. You go onto the sofa, Lilin; go on, Lilin honey, clear out now, let Gim get to bed."

Lilin lies there a bit, like a stone, then he pulls himself up, emitting a complaint without distinct words; he gets down from the bed, takes his pillow, a blanket, the tobacco from the table, the cigarette papers, matches, ashtray. "Go on, Lilin honey, go on." Tiny and hunched, he goes off under his load toward the sofa in the corridor.

Gim smokes as he undresses, folds his trousers neatly and hangs them up, arranges his jacket around a chair by the head



* * *



of the bed, brings the cigarettes from the dresser to the night table, matches, an ashtray, and climbs into bed. Armanda turns off the lamp and sighs. Gim smokes. Lilin sleeps in the corridor. Armanda rolls Over. Gim stubs out his cigarette. There is a knocking at the door.

With one hand Gim is already touching the revolver in the pocket of his jacket; with the other he has taken Armanda by the elbow, warning her to be careful. Armanda's arm is fat and soft; they stay like that for a while.

"Ask who it is, Lilin," Armanda says in a low voice.

Lilin, in the hall, huffs impatiently. "Who is it?" he asks rudely.

"Hey, Armanda, it's me. Angelo."

"Angelo who?" she says.

"Angelo the sergeant, Armanda. I happened to be going by, and I thought I'd come up. ... Can you open the door a minute?"

Gim has got out of the bed and is signaling her to be quiet. He opens a door, looks into the bathroom, takes the chair with his clothes, and carries it inside.

"Nobody's seen me. Get rid of him fast," he says softly and locks himself in the bathroom.

"Come on, Lilin honey, get back into bed; come on, Lilin." From the bed, Armanda directs the rearrangement.

"Armanda, you're keeping me waiting," the other man says, beyond the door.

Calmly, Lilin collects blanket, pillow, tobacco, matches, papers, ashtray, and comes back to bed, gets in, and pulls the sheet to his eyes. Armanda grabs the cord and clicks open the door.

Sergeant Soddu comes in; he has the rumpled look of an



* * *



old policeman in civilian clothes, his mustache gray against his fat face.

"You're out late, Sergeant," Armanda says.

"Oh, I was just taking a walk," Soddu says, "and I thought I'd pay you a call."

"What was it you wanted?"

Soddu was at the head of the bed, wiping his sweaty face with his handkerchief.

"Nothing, just a little visit. What's new?"

"New how?"

"Have you seen Albanesi, by any chance?"

"Gim? What's he done now?"

"Nothing. Kid stuff ... We wanted to ask him something. Have you seen him?"

"Three days ago."

"I mean now."

"I've been asleep for two hours, Sarge. Why are you asking me? Go ask his girls : Rosy, Nilde, Lola. ..."

"No use. When he's in trouble, he stays away from them."

"He hasn't shown up here. Next time, Sarge."

"Well, Armanda, I was just asking. Anyway, I'm glad to pay you a visit."

"Good night, Sarge."

"Good night."

Soddu turned, but didn't leave.

"I was thinking ... it's practically morning, and I don't have any other rounds to make. I don't feel like going back to that cot. As long as I'm here, I've got half a mind to stay. What about it, Armanda?"

"Sergeant, you're always great, but to tell you the truth, at this time of night I'm not receiving. That's how it is, Sarge. We all have our schedule."



* * *



"Armanda ... an old friend like me." Soddu was already removing his jacket, his undershirt.

"You're a nice man, Sergeant. Why don't we get together tomorrow night?"

Soddu went on undressing. "It's to pass the night, you understand, Armanda? Well, make some room for me."

"Lilin will go on the sofa, then. Go on, Lilin honey, go on out now."

Lilin groped with his long hands, found the tobacco on the table, pulled himself up, grumbling, climbed from the bed almost without opening his eyes, collected pillow, blanket, papers, matches. "Go on, Lilin honey." He went off, dragging the blanket along the hall. Soddu turned over between the sheets.

Next door, Gim looked through the panes of the little window at the sky, turning green. He had left his cigarettes on the table, that was the trouble. And now the other man was getting into bed and Gim had to stay shut up until daylight between that bidet and those boxes of talcum powder, unable to smoke. He had dressed again in silence, had combed his hair neatly, looking at himself in the washstand mirror, above the fence of perfumes and eyedrops and syringes and medicines and insecticides that adorned the shelf. He read some labels in the light from the window, stole a box of pills, then continued his tour of the bathroom. There weren't many discoveries to be made: some clothes in a tub, others on a line. He tested the taps of the bidet; the water spurted noisily. What if Soddu had heard? To hell with Soddu and with jail. Gim was bored; he went back to the basin, sprinkled some cologne on his jacket, spread brilliantine on his hair. The fact was, if they didn't arrest him today, they would tomorrow, but they hadn't caught him red-handed, and if all went well



* * *



they'd turn him loose right away. To wait there another two or three hours, without cigarettes, in that cubbyhole ... why did he bother? Of course they'd let him out right away. He opened a closet; it creaked. To hell with the closet and everything else. Inside it, Armanda's clothes were hanging. Gim stuck his revolver into the pocket of a fur coat. I'll come back and get it, he thought; she won't be wearing this till winter anyhow. He drew out his hand, white with naphthalene. All the better: the gun won't get moth-eaten. He laughed. He went to wash his hands again, but Armanda's towels turned his stomach and he dried himself on a topcoat in the closet.

Lying in bed, Soddu had heard noises next door. He put one hand on Armanda. "Who's there?" She turned, pressed to him, and put her big, soft arm around his neck. "It's nothing. ... Who could it be? ..." Soddu didn't want to free himself, but he still heard movements in there, and he asked, as if playing: "What is it? What's that?"

Gim opened the door. "Come on, Sarge, don't play dumb. Arrest me."

Soddu reached out one hand to the revolver in his jacket, hung on a peg; but he didn't let go of Armanda. "Who's that?"

"Gim Bolero."

"Hands up."

"I'm not armed, Sarge, don't be silly. I'm turning myself in."

He was standing at the head of the bed, his jacket around his shoulders, his hands half raised.

"Oh, Gim," Armanda said.

"I'll come back to see you in a few days, Anda," Gim said.



* * *



Soddu got up, mumbling, and slipped on his trousers. "What a lousy job ... Never a moment's peace ..."

Gim took his cigarettes from the table, lighted one, slipped the pack into his pocket.

"Give me a smoke, Gim," Armanda said, and she leaned out, lifting her flabby bosom.

Gim put a cigarette in her mouth, lighted it for her, helped Soddu on with his jacket. "Let's go, Sarge."

"Another time, Armanda," Soddu said.

"So long, Angelo," she said.

"So long, Armanda," Soddu said again.

" 'Bye, Gim."

They went out. In the corridor Lilin was sleeping, perched on the edge of the broken-down sofa; he didn't even move.

Armanda was smoking, seated on the big bed; she turned off the lamp, because a gray light was already coming into the room.

"Lilin," she called. "Come on, Lilin, come to bed, come on, Lilin honey, come."

Lilin was already gathering up the pillow, the ashtray.



* * *



STORIES

OF LOVE

AND

LONELINESS



* * *



THE ADVENTURE OF A SOLDIER

In the compartment, a lady came and sat down, tall and buxom, next to Private Tomagra. She must have been a widow from the provinces, to judge by her dress and her veil: the dress was black silk, appropriate for prolonged mourning, but with useless frills and furbelows; and the veil went all around her face, falling from the brim of a massive, old-fashioned hat. Other places were free, there in the compartment, Private Tomagra noticed, and he had assumed the widow would surely choose one of them. But, on the contrary, despite the vicinity of a coarse soldier like himself, she came and sat right there—no doubt for some reason connected with travel, the soldier quickly decided, a draft, or the direction of the train.

Her body was in full bloom, solid, indeed a bit square. If its upper curves had not been tempered by a matronly softness, you would have said she was no more than thirty; but when you looked at her face, at the complexion both marmoreal and relaxed, the unattainable gaze beneath the heavy eyelids and the thick black brows, at the sternly sealed lips, hastily colored with a jarring red, she seemed, instead, past forty.

Tomagra, a young infantryman on his first leave (it was



* * *



Easter), huddled down in his seat for fear that the lady, so ample and shapely, might not fit; immediately he found himself in the aura of her perfume, a popular and perhaps cheap scent, but now, out of long wear, blended with natural human odors.

The lady sat down with a composed demeanor, revealing, there beside him, less majestic proportions than he had imagined when he had seen her standing. Her hands were plump, with tight, dark rings; she kept them folded in her lap, over a shiny purse and a jacket she had taken off to expose round, white arms. At her first movement Tomagra had shifted to make space for a broad maneuvering of her arms; but she had remained almost motionless, slipping out of the sleeves with a few brief twitches of her shoulders and torso.

The railroad seat was therefore fairly comfortable for two, and Tomagra could feel the lady's extreme closeness, though without any fear of offending her by his contact. All the same, Tomagra reasoned, lady though she was, she had surely not shown any sign of repugnance toward him, toward his rough uniform; otherwise she would have sat farther away. And at these thoughts his muscles, till now contracted and tensed, relaxed freely, serenely; indeed, without his moving, they tried to expand to their greatest extension, and his leg—its tendons taut, at first detached even from the cloth of his trousers—settled more broadly, tightening the material that covered it, and the wool grazed the widow's black silk. And now, through this wool and that silk, the soldier's leg was adhering to her leg with a soft, fleeting motion, like one shark grazing another, and sending waves through its veins to those other veins.

It was still a very light contact, which every jolt of the train



* * *



could break off and re-create; the lady had strong, fat knees, and Tomagra's bones could sense at every jerk the lazy bump of the kneecap. The calf had raised a silken cheek that, with an imperceptible thrust, had to be made to coincide with his own. This meeting of calves was precious, but it came at a price, a loss: in fact, the body's weight was shifted and the reciprocal support of the hips no longer occurred with the same docile abandon. In order to achieve a natural and satisfied position, it was necessary to move slightly on the seat, with the aid of a curve in the track, and also of the comprehensible need to shift position every so often.

The lady was impassive beneath her matronly hat, her gaze fixed, lidded, and her hands steady on the purse in her lap. And yet her body, for a very long stretch, rested against that stretch of man: hadn't she realized this yet? Or was she preparing to flee? To rebel?

Tomagra decided to transmit, somehow, a message to her: he contracted the muscle of his calf into a kind of hard, square fist, and then with this calf-fist, as if a hand inside it wanted to open, he quickly knocked at the calf of the widow. To be sure, this was a very rapid movement, barely long enough for a flicker of the tendons; but in any case, she didn't draw back —at least not so far as he could tell, because immediately, needing to justify that covert movement, Tomagra extended his leg as if to get a kink out of it.

Now he had to begin all over again; that patient and prudently established contact had been lost. Tomagra decided to be more courageous; as if looking for something, he stuck his hand in his pocket, the pocket toward the woman, and then, as if absently, he left it there. It had been a rapid action, Tomagra didn't know whether he had touched her or not, an



* * *



inconsequential gesture; yet he now realized what an important step forward he had made, and in what a risky game he was now involved. Against the back of his hand, the hip of the lady in black was now pressing; he felt it weighing on every finger, ever knuckle; now any movement of his hand would have been an act of incredible intimacy toward the widow. Holding his breath, Tomagra turned his hand inside his pocket; in other words, he set the palm toward the lady, open against her, though still in that pocket. It was an impossible position, the wrist twisted. And yet at this point he might just as well attempt a decisive action: and so he ventured to move the fingers of that contorted hand. There could no longer be any possible doubt: the widow couldn't have helped noticing his maneuvering, and if she didn't draw back, but pretended to be impassive and absent, it meant that she wasn't rejecting his advances. When Tomagra thought about it, however, her paying no attention to his mobile right hand might mean that she really believed he was hunting for something in that pocket: a railroad ticket, a match. ... There: and if now the soldier's fingertips, the pads, seemingly endowed with a sudden clairvoyance, could sense through those different stuffs the hems of subterranean garments and even the very minute roughness of skin, pores and moles—if, as I said, his fingertips arrived at this, perhaps her flesh, marmoreal and lazy, was hardly aware that these were, in fact, fingertips, and not, for example, nails or knuckles.

Then, with furtive steps, the hand emerged from the pocket, paused there undecided, and, with sudden haste to adjust the trouser along the side seam, proceeded all the way down to the knee. More precisely, it cleared a path: to go forward, it had to dig in between himself and the woman,



* * *



a route that, even in its speed, was rich in anxieties and sweet emotions.

It must be said that Tomagra had thrown his head back against the seat, so one might also have thought he was sleeping: this was not so much an alibi for himself as it was a way of offering the lady, in the event that his insistence didn't irritate her, a reason to feel at ease, knowing that his actions were divorced from his consciousness, barely surfacing from the depths of sleep. And there, from this alert semblance of sleep, Tomagra's hand, clutching his knee, detached one finger, and sent it out to reconnoiter. The finger slid along her knee, which remained still and docile; Tomagra could perform diligent figures with the little finger on the silk of the stocking, which, through his half-closed eyes, he could barely glimpse, light and curving. But he realized that the risk of this game was without reward, because the little finger, scant of surface and awkward in movement, transmitted only partial hints of sensations and was incapable of conceiving the form and substance of what it was touching.

Then he reattached the little finger to the rest of the hand, not withdrawing it, but adding to it the ring finger, the middle finger, the forefinger: now his whole hand rested inert on that female knee, and the train cradled it in a rocking caress.

It was then that Tomagra thought of the others: if the lady, whether out of compliance or out of a mysterious intangibility, didn't react to his boldness, facing them were still seated other persons who might be scandalized by that non-soldierly behavior of his, and by that possible silent complicity on the woman's part. Chiefly to spare the lady such suspicion, Tomagra withdrew his hand, or rather, he hid it,



* * *



as if it were the only guilty party. But hiding it, he later thought, was only a hypocritical pretext: in abandoning it there on the seat he intended simply to move it closer to the lady, who occupied, in fact, such a large part of the space.

Indeed, the hand groped around. There: like a butterfly's lighting, the fingers already sensed her presence; and there : it was enough merely to thrust the whole palm forward gently, and the widow's gaze beneath the veil was impenetrable, the bosom only faintly stirred by her respiration. But no! Tomagra had already withdrawn his hand, like a mouse scurrying off.

She didn't move; he thought: Maybe she wants this. But he also thought: Another moment and it will be too late. Or maybe she's sitting there studying me, preparing to make a scene.

Then, for no reason except prudent verification, Tomagra slid his hand along the back of the seat and waited until the train's jolts, imperceptibly, made the lady slide over his fingers. To say he waited is not correct: actually, with the tips of his fingers wedgelike between the seat and her, he made an invisible push, which could also have been the effect of the train's speeding. If he stopped at a certain point, it wasn't because the lady had given any indication of disapproval, but, on the contrary, because Tomagra thought that if she did accept, it would be easy for her, with a half rotation of the muscles, to meet him halfway, to fall, as it were, on that expectant hand. To suggest to her the friendly nature of his attention, Tomagra, in that position beneath the lady, attempted a discreet wiggle of the fingers; the lady was looking out of the window, and her hand was idly toying with the purse clasp, opening and closing it. Was this a signal to him to stop? Was it a final concession she was granting him, a



* * *



warning that her patience could be tried no longer? Was it this?—Tomagra asked himself—Was it this?

He noticed that his hand, like a stubby octopus, was clasping her flesh. Now all was decided: he could no longer draw back, not Tomagra. But what about her? She was a sphinx.

With a crab's oblique scuttle, the soldier's hand now descended her thigh. Was it out in the open, before the eyes of the others? No, now the lady was adjusting the jacket she held folded on her lap, allowing it to spill to one side. To offer him cover, or to block his path? There: now the hand moved freely and unseen, it clasped her, it opened in fleeting caresses like brief puffs of wind. But the widow's face was still turned away, distant; Tomagra stared at a part of her, a zone of naked skin between the ear and the curve of her full chignon. And in that dimple beneath the ear a vein throbbed: this was the answer she was giving him, clear, heart-rending, and fleeting. She turned her face all of a sudden, proud and marmoreal; the veil hanging below the hat stirred like a curtain; the gaze was lost beneath the heavy lids. But that gaze had gone past him, Tomagra, perhaps had not even grazed him; she was looking beyond him, at something, or nothing, the pretext of some thought, but anyway something more important than he. This he decided later, because earlier, when he had barely seen that movement of hers, he had immediately thrown himself back and shut his eyes tight, as if he were asleep, trying to quell the flush spreading over his face, and thus perhaps losing the opportunity to catch in the first glint of her eyes an answer to his own extreme doubts.

His hand, hidden under the black jacket, had remained as if detached from him, numb, the fingers drawn back toward the wrist: no longer a real hand, now without sensitivity be-



* * *



yond that arboreal sensitivity of the bones. But as the truce the widow had granted to her own impassivity with that vague glance around soon ended, blood and courage flowed back into the hand. And it was then that, resuming contact with that soft saddle of leg, he realized he had reached a limit : the fingers were running along the hem of the skirt, beyond which there was the leap to the knee, and the void.

It was the end, Private Tomagra thought, of this secret spree. Thinking back, he found it truly a poor thing in his memory, though he had greedily blown it up while experiencing it: a clumsy feel of a silk dress, something that could in no way have been denied him simply because of his miserable position as a soldier, and something that the lady had discreetly condescended, without any show, to concede.

He was interrupted, however, in his desolate intention of withdrawing his hand when he noticed the way she was holding her jacket on her knees: no longer folded (though it had seemed so to him before), but flung carelessly, so that one edge fell in front of her legs. His hand was thus in a sealed den—perhaps a final proof of the trust the lady was giving him, confident that the disparity between her station and the soldier's was so great that he surely wouldn't take advantage of the opportunity. And the soldier recalled, with effort, what had happened so far between the widow and himself as he tried to discover something in her behavior that hinted at further condescension; now he considered whether his own actions had been insignificant and trivial, casual graz-ings and strokings, or, on the other hand, of a decisive intimacy, committing him not to withdraw again.

His hand surely agreed with this second consideration, because before he could reflect on the irreparable nature of the



* * *



act, he was already passing the frontier. And the lady? She was asleep. She had rested her head, with the pompous hat, against a corner of the seat, and she was keeping her eyes closed. Should he, Tomagra, respect this sleep, genuine or false as it might be, and retire? Or was it a consenting woman's device, which he should already know, for which he should somehow indicate gratitude? The point he had now reached admitted no hesitation: he could only advance.

Private Tomagra's hand was small and plump, and its hard parts and calluses had become so blended with the muscle that it was uniform, flexible; the bones could not be felt, and its movement was made more with nerves, though gently, than with joints. And this little hand had constant and general and minuscule movements, to maintain the completeness of the contact alive and burning. But when, finally, a first stirring ran through the widow's softness, like the motion of distant marine currents through secret underwater channels, the soldier was so surprised by it that, as if he really supposed the widow had noticed nothing till then, had really been asleep, he drew his hand away in fright.

Now he sat there with his hands on his own knees, huddled in his seat as he had been when she came in. He was behaving absurdly; he realized that. With a scraping of heels, a stretching of hips, he seemed eager to re-establish the contacts, but this prudence of his was absurd, too, as if he wanted to start his extremely patient operation again from the beginning, as if he were not sure now of the deep goals already gained. But had he really gained them? Or had it been only a dream?

A tunnel fell upon them. The darkness became denser and denser, and Tomagra, first with timid gestures, occasionally drawing back as if he were really at the first advances and



* * *



yond that arboreal sensitivity of the bones. But as the truce the widow had granted to her own impassivity with that vague glance around soon ended, blood and courage flowed back into the hand. And it was then that, resuming contact with that soft saddle of leg, he realized he had reached a limit : the fingers were running along the hem of the skirt, beyond which there was the leap to the knee, and the void.

It was the end, Private Tomagra thought, of this secret spree. Thinking back, he found it truly a poor thing in his memory, though he had greedily blown it up while experiencing it: a clumsy feel of a silk dress, something that could in no way have been denied him simply because of his miserable position as a soldier, and something that the lady had discreetly condescended, without any show, to concede.

He was interrupted, however, in his desolate intention of withdrawing his hand when he noticed the way she was holding her jacket on her knees: no longer folded (though it had seemed so to him before), but flung carelessly, so that one edge fell in front of her legs. His hand was thus in a sealed den—perhaps a final proof of the trust the lady was giving him, confident that the disparity between her station and the soldier's was so great that he surely wouldn't take advantage of the opportunity. And the soldier recalled, with effort, what had happened so far between the widow and himself as he tried to discover something in her behavior that hinted at further condescension; now he considered whether his own actions had been insignificant and trivial, casual graz-ings and strokings, or, on the other hand, of a decisive intimacy, committing him not to withdraw again.

His hand surely agreed with this second consideration, because before he could reflect on the irreparable nature of the



* * *



act, he was already passing the frontier. And the lady? She was asleep. She had rested her head, with the pompous hat, against a corner of the seat, and she was keeping her eyes closed. Should he, Tomagra, respect this sleep, genuine or false as it might be, and retire? Or was it a consenting woman's device, which he should already know, for which he should somehow indicate gratitude? The point he had now reached admitted no hesitation: he could only advance.

Private Tomagra's hand was small and plump, and its hard parts and calluses had become so blended with the muscle that it was uniform, flexible; the bones could not be felt, and its movement was made more with nerves, though gently, than with joints. And this little hand had constant and general and minuscule movements, to maintain the completeness of the contact alive and burning. But when, finally, a first stirring ran through the widow's softness, like the motion of distant marine currents through secret underwater channels, the soldier was so surprised by it that, as if he really supposed the widow had noticed nothing till then, had really been asleep, he drew his hand away in fright.

Now he sat there with his hands on his own knees, huddled in his seat as he had been when she came in. He was behaving absurdly; he realized that. With a scraping of heels, a stretching of hips, he seemed eager to re-establish the contacts, but this prudence of his was absurd, too, as if he wanted to start his extremely patient operation again from the beginning, as if he were not sure now of the deep goals already gained. But had he really gained them? Or had it been only a dream?

A tunnel fell upon them. The darkness became denser and denser, and Tomagra, first with timid gestures, occasionally drawing back as if he were really at the first advances and



* * *



amazed at his own temerity, then trying more and more to convince himself of the profound intimacy he had already reached with that woman, extended one hand, shy as a pullet, toward her bosom, large and somewhat abandoned to its own gravity, and with an eager groping he tried to explain to her the misery and the unbearable happiness of his condition, and his need of nothing else but for her to emerge from her reserve.

The widow did react, but with a sudden gesture of shielding herself and rejecting him. It was enough to send Tomagra crouching in his corner, wringing his hands. But it was, probably, a false alarm caused by a passing light in the corridor, which had made the widow fear the tunnel was suddenly going to end. Perhaps; or had he gone too far, had he committed some horrible rudeness toward her, who had already been so generous toward him? No, by now there could be nothing forbidden between them; and her action, on the contrary, was a sign that this was all real, that she accepted, participated. Tomagra approached again. To be sure, in these reflections a great deal of time had been wasted; the tunnel wouldn't last much longer, and it wasn't wise to allow oneself to be caught by the sudden light. Tomagra was already expecting the first grayness there on the wall; the more he expected it, the riskier it was to attempt anything. Of course, this was a long tunnel; he remembered it from other journeys as very, very long. And if he took advantage immediately, he would have a lot of time ahead of him. Now it was best to wait for the end, but it never ended, and so this had perhaps been his last chance. There: now the darkness was being dispelled, it was ending.

They were at the last stations of a provincial line. The train was emptying; some passengers in the compartment had already got out, and now the last ones were taking down



* * *



their bags, leaving. Finally they were alone in the compartment, the soldier and the widow, very close and detached, their arms folded, silent, eyes staring into space. Tomagra still had to think: Now that all the seats are free, if she wanted to be nice and comfortable, if she were fed up with me, she would move....

Something restrained him and frightened him still, perhaps the presence of a group of smokers in the passage, or a light that had come on because it was evening. Then he thought to draw the curtains on the passage, like somebody wanting to get some sleep. He stood up with elephantine steps; with slow, meticulous care be began to unfasten the curtains, draw them, fasten them again. When he turned, he found her stretched out. As if she wanted to sleep: even though she had her eyes open and staring, she had slipped down, maintaining her matronly composure intact, with the majestic hat still on her head, which was resting on the seat arm.

Tomagra was standing over her. Still, to protect this image of sleep, he chose also to darken the outside window; and he stretched over her, to undo the curtain. But it was only a way of shifting his clumsy actions above the impassive widow. Then he stopped tormenting that curtain's snap and understood he had to do something else; show her all his own, compelling condition of desire, if only to explain to her the misunderstanding into which she had certainly fallen, as if to say to her: You see, you were kind to me because you believe we have a remote need for affection, we poor lonely soldiers, but here is what I really am, this is how I received your courtesy, this is the degree of impossible ambition I have reached, you see, here.

And since it was now evident that nothing could manage



* * *



to surprise the lady, and indeed everything seemed somehow to have been foreseen by her, Private Tomagra could only make sure that no further doubts were possible; and finally the urgency of his madness managed also to grasp its mute object: her.

When Tomagra stood up and, beneath him, the widow remained with her clear, stern gaze (she had blue eyes), with her hat and veil still squarely on her head, and the train never stopped its shrill whistling through the fields, and outside those endless rows of grapevines went on, and the rain that throughout the journey had tirelessly streaked the panes now resumed with new violence, he had again a brief spurt of fear, thinking how he, Private Tomagra, had been so daring.



* * *



THE ADVENTURE OF A BATHER

While enjoying a swim at the beach at - , Signora

Isotta Barbarino had an unfortunate mishap. She was swimming far out in the water, and when it seemed time to go back in and she turned toward the shore, she realized that an irreparable event had occurred. She had lost her bathing suit.

She couldn't tell whether it had slipped off just then, or whether she had already been swimming without it for some time, but of the new two-piece suit she had been wearing, only the halter was left. At some twist of her hip, some buttons must have popped, and the bottom part, reduced to a shapeless rag, had slipped down her leg. Perhaps it was still sinking a few feet below her; she tried dropping down underwater to look for it, but she immediately lost her breath, and only vague green shadows flashed before her eyes.

Stifling the anxiety rising inside her, she tried to think in a calm, orderly fashion. It was noon; there were people around in the sea, in kayaks and in rowboats, or swimming. She didn't know anyone; she had arrived the day before with her husband, who had had to go back to the city at once. Now there was no other course, the signora thought (and she was the first to be surprised at her clear, serene reasoning), but to



* * *



find among these people a beach attendant's boat, which there had to be, or the boat of some other person who inspired trust, hail it, or, rather, approach it, and manage to ask for both help and tact.

This is what Signora Isotta was thinking as she kept afloat, huddled almost into a ball, pawing the water, not daring to look around. Only her head emerged and, unconsciously, she lowered her face toward the surface, not to delve into its secrecy, now held inviolable, but like someone rubbing eyelids and temples against the sheet or the pillow to stem tears provoked by some night-thought. And it was a genuine pressure of tears that she felt at the corners of her eyes, and perhaps that instinctive movement of her head was really meant to dry those tears in the sea : this is how distraught she was, this is what a gap there was in her between reason and feeling. She wasn't calm, then: she was desperate. Inside that motionless sea, wrinkled only at long intervals by the barely indicated hump of a wave, she also kept herself motionless, no longer with slow strokes, but only by a pleading movement of the hands, half in the water; and the most alarming sign of her condition, though perhaps not even she realized it, was this usury of strength she was observing, as if she had a very long and exhausting time ahead of her.

She had put on her two-piece suit that morning for the first time; and at the beach, in the midst of all those strangers, she realized it made her feel a bit ill at ease. But the moment she was in the water, she had felt content, freer in her movements, with a greater desire to swim. She liked to take long swims, well away from the shore, but her pleasure was not an athlete's, for she was actually rather plump and lazy; what meant most to her was the intimacy with the water, feeling herself a part of that peaceful sea. Her new suit gave her that



* * *



very impression; indeed, the first thing she had thought as she swam was: It's like being naked. The only irksome thing was the recollection of that crowded beach. It was not unreasonable that her future beach acquaintances would perhaps form an idea of her that they would have to some extent to modify later: not so much an opinion about her behavior, since at the seaside all the women dressed like this, but a belief, for example, that she was athletic, or fashionable, whereas she was really a very simple, domestic person. It was perhaps because she was already feeling this sensation of herself as different from usual that she had noticed nothing when the mishap took place. Now that uneasiness she had felt on the beach, and that novelty of the water on her bare skin, and her vague concern at having to return among the other bathers: all had been enlarged and engulfed by her new and far more serious dismay.

What she would have preferred never to look at was the beach. And she looked at it. Bells were ringing noon; and on the beach the great umbrellas with black and yellow concentric circles were casting black shadows in which the bodies became flat, and the teeming of the bathers spilled into the sea; and none of the boats was on the shore now, and as soon as one returned it was seized even before it could touch bottom; and the black rim of the blue expanse was disturbed by constant explosions of white splashing, especially behind the ropes, where the horde of children was roiling; and at every bland wave a shouting arose, its notes immediately swallowed up by the blast. Just off that beach, she was naked.

Nobody would have suspected it, seeing only her head rising from the water, and occasionally her arms and her bosom, as she swam cautiously, never lifting her body to the surface. She could, then, carry out her search for help without



* * *



exposing herself too much. And to check how much of her could be glimpsed by alien eyes, Signora Isotta now and then stopped and tried to look at herself, floating almost vertically. With anxiety she saw the sun's beams sway in the water in limpid, underwater glints, and illuminate drifting seaweed and rapid schools of little striped fish, on the bottom the corrugated sand, and on top, her body. In vain, twisting it with clenched legs, she tried to hide it from her own gaze : the skin of the pale belly gleamed revealingly, between the tan of the bosom and the thighs, and neither the motion of a wave nor the half-sunken drift of seaweed could merge the darkness and the pallor of her abdomen. The signora resumed swimming in that mongrel way of hers, keeping her body as low as she could, but, never stopping, she would turn to look over her shoulder, out of the corner of her eye: at every stroke, all the white breadth of her person appeared in the light of day, in its most identifiable and secret forms. She did everything possible to change the style and direction of her swimming—she turned in the water, she observed herself at every angle and in every light, she writhed upon herself— and always this offensive, naked body pursued her. It was a flight from her own body that she was attempting, as if from another person whom she, Signora Isotta, was unable to save at a difficult juncture, and could only abandon to her fate. Yet this body, so rich and so impossible to conceal, had indeed been a glory of hers, a source of self-satisfaction; only a contradictory chain of circumstances, apparently sensible, could make it now a cause for shame. Or perhaps not; perhaps her life always consisted only of the clothed lady she had been all of her days, and her nakedness hardly belonged to her, was a rash state of nature revealed only every now and then, arousing wonder in human beings, foremost in her. Now



* * *



Signora Isotta recalled that even when she was alone or in private with her husband she had always surrounded her being naked with an air of complicity, of irony, part embarrassed and part feline, as if she were temporarily putting on joyous but outrageous disguises, for a kind of secret carnival between husband and wife. She had become accustomed with some reluctance to owning a body, after the first disappointed, romantic years, and she had taken it on like someone who learns he can command a long-yearned-for property. Now the awareness of this right of hers disappeared again among the old fears, as that yelling beach loomed ahead.

When noon had passed, among the bathers scattered through the sea a reflux toward the shore began; it was the hour of lunch at the pensioni, of picnics outside the cabins, and also the hour in which the sand was to be enjoyed at its most searing, under the vertical sun. As the keels of boats and the pontoons of catamarans passed close to the signora, she studied the faces of the men on board, and sometimes she almost decided to move toward them; but each time a flash, a glance beneath their lashes, or the hint of an abrupt jerk of shoulder or elbow put her to flight, with false-casual strokes, whose calm masked an already burdensome weariness. The men in the boats, alone or in groups, boys all excited by the physical exercise, or gentlemen with shrewd demands or insistent gaze, on encountering her—lost in the sea, her prim face unable to conceal a shy, pleading anxiety, with a cap that gave her a slightly peevish, doll-like expression, and with her soft shoulders heaving around, uncertain—immediately emerged from their self-centered or bustling nirvana. Those who were not alone pointed her out to their companions with a snap of the chin or a wink; and those who were alone, braking with one oar, swerved their prow deliberately to cross her path. Her need



* * *



for trust was met by these rising barriers of slyness and double-entendre, a hedge of piercing pupils, of incisors bared in ambiguous laughter, of oars pausing, suddenly interrogatory, on the surface of the water; and the only thing she could do was flee. An occasional swimmer passed by, ducking his head blindly and puffing out spurts of water without raising his eyes; but the signora distrusted these men and evaded them. In fact, even though they passed at some distance from her, the swimmers, overcome by sudden fatigue, let themselves float and stretched their legs in a senseless splashing until she displayed her disdain by moving away. Thus this net of insistent hints was already spread around her, as if lying in ambush for her, as if each of those men had been daydreaming for years of a woman to whom what had happened to her would happen, and these men spent their summers at the sea hoping to be present at the right moment. There was no way out: the front of preordained male insinuations extended to all men, with no possible breach, and that savior she had stubbornly dreamed of as the most anonymous possible creature, almost angelic, a beach boy, a sailor, could not exist: she was now sure of that. The beach guard she did see pass by, certainly the only one who would be out in a boat to prevent possible accidents, given this calm sea, had such fleshy lips and such tense muscles that she would never have had the courage to entrust herself to his hands, even if—she actually thought in the emotion of the omment—it were to have him unlock a cabin or set up an umbrella.

In her disappointed fantasies, the people to whom she had hoped to turn had always been men. She hadn't thought of women, and yet with them everything should have been more simple; a kind of female solidarity would certainly have gone into action in this serious crisis, in this anxiety that only a



* * *



fellow woman could completely understand. But possibilities of communication with members of her own sex were rarer and more uncertain, unlike the perilous ease of encounters with men; and a distrust—reciprocal this time—blocked such communication. Most of the women went by in catamarans accompanied by men, and they were jealous, inaccessible, seeking the open sea, where the body, whose shame she suffered passively, would for them be the weapon of an aggressive and calculable strategy. Now and then a boat came out packed with chirping, overheated young girls, and the signora thought of the distance between the profound vulgarity of her suffering and their volatile heedlessness; she thought of how she would have to repeat her appeal to them, because they surely wouldn't understand her the first time; she thought of how their expression would change at the news, and she couldn't bring herself to call out to them. A blonde also went by in a catamaran, alone, tanned, full of smugness and egoism; surely she was going far out to take the sun completely naked, and it would never remotely occur to her that nakedness could be a misfortune or a torment. Signora Isotta realized then how alone a woman is, and how rare, among her own kind, is solidarity, spontaneous and good (destroyed perhaps by the pact made with man), which would have foreseen her appeals and come to her side at the merest hint in the moment of a secret misfortune no man would understand. Women would never save her; and her own man was away. She felt her strength abandoning her.

A little rust-colored buoy, till then fought over by a cluster of diving kids, was suddenly, at a general plunge, deserted. A seagull lighted on it, flapped its wings, then flew off as Signora Isotta grasped the buoy's rim. She would have drowned if she hadn't grabbed it in time. But not even death



* * *



was possible, not even that indefensible, excessive remedy was left her: when she was about to faint and couldn't manage to keep her chin up, drawn down toward the water, she saw a rapid, tensed alertness among the men on the surrounding boats, all ready to dive in and come to her rescue. They were there only to save her, to carry her naked and unconscious among the questions and stares of a curious public; and her risk of death would have achieved only the ridiculous and vulgar result that she was trying in vain to evade.

From the buoy, looking at the swimmers and rowers, who seemed to be gradually reabsorbed by the shore, she remembered the marvelous weariness of those returns, and the cries from one boat to another—"See you on shore!" or "I'll race you there!"—filled her with a boundless envy. But then, when she noticed a thin man in long pants, the only person still out in the water, standing erect in a motionless motorboat, looking at something or other in the water, immediately her longing to go ashore burrowed down, hid within her fear of being seen, her anxious effort to conceal herself behind the buoy.

She no longer remembered how long she had been there: already the beach crowd was thinning out, boats were again lined up on the sand, the umbrellas, furled one after the other, were now only a cemetery of short poles, the gulls skimmed the water, and on the motionless motorboat the thin man had disappeared and in his place a dumbfounded boy's curly head peered from the side; and over the sun a cloud passed, driven by a just-wakened wind against a cumulus collected above the hills. The signora thought of that hour as seen from the land, the polite afternoons, the destiny of unassuming correctness and respectful joys she had thought was guaranteed her and of the contemptible incongruity that



* * *



had occurred to contradict it, like the chastisement for a sin not committed. Not committed? But that abandonment of hers in bathing, that desire to swim all alone, that joy in her own body in the two-piece suit recklessly chosen: weren't these perhaps signs of a flight begun some time past, the defiance of an inclination to sin, the progressive stages of a mad race toward this state of nakedness that now appeared to her in all its wretched pallor? And the society of men, among whom she had thought to pass intact like a big butterfly, pretending a compliant, doll-like nonchalance, now revealed its basic cruelties, its doubly diabolical essence, the presence of an evil against which she had not sufficiently armed herself and, at once, the agent, the instrument of her sentence.

Clinging to the studs of the buoy with bloodless fingertips now with accentuated wrinkles from the prolonged stay in the water, the signora felt herself cast out by the whole world, and she couldn't understand why this nakedness that all people carry with themselves forever should banish her alone, as if she were the only one who was naked, the only being who could remain naked under heaven. And as she raised her eyes, she saw now the man and boy together on the motor-boat, both standing, making signs to her as if to say she should remain there, that she shouldn't distress herself pointlessly. They were serious, the two of them, composed, unlike any of the other, earlier, ones, as if they were announcing a verdict to her: she was to resign herself, she alone had been chosen to pay for all. If, as they gesticulated, they tried to muster a kind of smile, it was without any hint of maliciousness: perhaps an invitation to accept her sentence good-naturedly, willingly.

Immediately the boat sped off, faster than one would have



* * *



thought possible, and the two paid attention to the motor and the course and didn't turn again toward the signora, who tried to smile back at them, as if to show that if she were accused only of being made in this way so dear and prized by all, if she had only to expiate our somewhat clumsy tenderness of forms, well, she would take the whole burden on herself, content.

The boat, with its mysterious movements, and her own tangled reasoning had kept her in a state of such timorous bewilderment that it was a while before she became aware of the cold. A sweet plumpness allowed Signora Isotta to take long and icy swims that amazed her husband and family, all thin people. But now she had been in the water too long, and the sun was covered, and her smooth skin rose in grainy bumps, and ice was slowly taking possession of her blood. There, in this shivering that ran through her, Isotta realized she was alive, and in danger of death, and innocent. Because the nakedness that had suddenly seemed to grow on her body was something she had always accepted not as a guilt but as her anxious innocence, as her secret fraternity with others, as flesh and root of her being in the world. And they, on the contrary, the smart men in the boats and the fearless women under the umbrellas, who did not accept it, who insinuated it was a crime, an accusation—only they were guilty. She didn't want to pay for them; and she wriggled, clinging to the buoy, her teeth chattering, tears on her cheeks. ... Over there, from the harbor, the motorboat was returning, even faster than before, and at the prow the boy was holding up a narrow green sail : a skirt!

When the boat stopped near her, and the thin man stretched out one hand to help her on board and covered his eyes with the other, smiling, the signora was already so far



* * *



from any hope of being saved, and the train of her thoughts had traveled so far afield, that for a moment she couldn't connect her senses with her reasoning and action, and she raised her hand toward the man's outstretched hand even before realizing that it wasn't her imagination, that the boat was really there, and had really come to her rescue. She understood, and all of a sudden everything became perfect and unfailing, and her thoughts, the cold, her fear were forgotten. From pale, she turned red as fire; and standing on the deck, she slipped on that garment while the man and the boy, facing the horizon, looked at the gulls.

They started the motor, and, seated at the prow in a green skirt with orange flowers, she saw on the bottom of the boat a mask for underwater fishing; and she knew how the pair had learned her secret. The boy, swimming below the surface with mask and harpoon, had seen her and had alerted the man, who had also dived in to see. Then, without being understood, they had motioned her to wait for them, and had sped to the port to procure a dress from some fisherman's wife.

The two were sitting at the poop, hands on their knees, and smiling: the boy, an urchin of about eight, was all eyes, with a dazed, coltish smile; the man had a gray, shaggy head, a brick-red body with long muscles, and a slightly sad smile, with a dead cigarette stuck to his lip. It occurred to Signora Isotta that perhaps the two of them, looking at her dressed, were trying to remember her as they had seen her underwater; but this didn't make her feel ill at ease. After all, since someone had perforce to see her, she was glad it had been these two, and also that they had felt curiosity and pleasure. To get to the beach, the man took the boat past the docks and the harbor and the vegetable gardens along the sea; anyone who saw them from the shore no doubt believed that the three



* * *



were a little family coming home in their boat as they did every evening during the fishing season. The gray fishermen's houses overlooked the dock; red nets were stretched across short stakes; and from the boats, already tied up, some youths lifted lead-colored fish and passed them to girls standing with square baskets, the low rims propped against their hips. Men with tiny gold earrings, seated on the ground with spread legs, were sewing endless nets; and in some tubs they were boiling tannin to dye the nets again. Little stone walls marked off tiny vegetable gardens on the sea, where the boats lay beside the canes of the seedbeds. Women with their mouths full of nails helped their husbands, lying under the keel, to patch holes. Every pink house had a low roof covered with tomatoes split in two and set out to dry with salt on a grill; and under the asparagus plants the kids were hunting for worms; and some old men with bellows were spraying insecticide on their loquats; and the yellow melons were growing under creeping leaves; and in flat pans the old women were frying squid and polyps or else pumpkin flowers dredged in flour; and the prows of fishing boats rose in the yards redolent of wood fresh from the plane; and a brawl among the boys caulking the hulls had broken out, with threats of brushes black with tar; and then the beach began, with the little sand castles and volcanoes abandoned by the children.

Signora Isotta, seated in the boat with that pair, in that excessive green-and-orange dress, would even have liked the trip to continue. But the boat was aiming its prow at the shore, and the beach attendants were carrying away the deck chairs, and the man had bent over the motor, turning his back: that brick-red back divided by the knobs of the spine, on which the hard, salty skin rippled as if moved by a sigh.



* * *



THE ADVENTURE OF A CLERK

It so happened that Enrico Gnei, a clerk, spent a night with a beautiful lady. Coming out of her house, early, he felt the air and the colors of the spring morning open before him, cool and bracing and new, and it was as if he were walking to the sound of music.

It must be said that only a lucky conjunction of circumstances had rewarded Enrico Gnei with this adventure: a party at some friends' house, a special, fleeting mood of the lady's—a woman otherwise controlled and hardly prone to obeying whims—a slight alcoholic stimulation, whether real or feigned, and in addition a rather favorable logistic combination at the moment of good-byes. All this, and not any personal charm of Gnei's—or, rather, none but his discreet and somewhat anonymous looks, which would mark him as an undemanding, unobtrusive companion—had produced the unexpected result of that night. He was well aware of all this and, modest by nature, he considered his good luck all the more precious. He also knew that the event would have no sequel; nor did he complain of that, because a steady relationship would have created problems too awkward for his usual



* * *



way of living. The perfection of the adventure lay in its having begun and ended in the space of a night. Therefore Enrico Gnei that morning was a man who has received what he could most desire in the world.

The lady's house was in the hill district. Gnei came down a green and fragrant boulevard. It was not yet the hour when he was accustomed to leave home for the office. The lady had made him slip out now, so the servants wouldn't see. The fact that he hadn't slept didn't bother him; in fact, it gave him a kind of unnatural lucidity, an arousal no longer of the senses but of the intellect. A gust of wind, a buzzing, an odor of trees seemed to him things he should somehow grasp and enjoy; he couldn't become accustomed again to humbler ways of savoring beauty.

Because he was a methodical sort of man, getting up in a strange house and dressing in haste without shaving left in him an impression of disturbed habits; for a moment he thought of dashing home to shave and tidy himself up before going to the office. He would have had the time, but Gnei immediately dismissed the idea; he preferred to convince himself it was too late, because he was seized by the fear that his house, the repetition of daily acts, would dispel the rich and extraordinary atmosphere in which he now moved.

He decided that his day would follow a calm and generous curve, to retain as far as possible the inheritance of that night. His memory, if he could patiently reconstruct the hours he had passed, second by second, promised him boundless Edens. And thus, letting his thoughts stray, Enrico Gnei went without haste to the beginning of the tramline.

The tram, almost empty, was waiting for the time when its schedule began. Some drivers were there, smoking. Gnei



* * *



whistled as he climbed aboard, his overcoat open, flapping; he sat down, sprawling slightly, then immediately assumed a more citified position, pleased that he had thought to correct himself promptly but not displeased by the carefree attitude that had come to him naturally.

The neighborhood was sparsely inhabited, and the inhabitants were not early risers. On the tram there was an elderly housewife, two workmen having an argument, and himself, the contented man. Solid, morning people. He found them likable; he, Enrico Gnei, was for them a mysterious gentleman, mysterious and content, never seen before on this tram at this hour. Where could he come from? they were perhaps asking themselves now. And he gave them no clue: he was looking at the wistaria. He was a man who looks at the wistaria like a man who knows how wistaria should be looked at: he was aware of this, Enrico Gnei was. He was a passenger who hands the money for his ticket to the conductor, and between him and the conductor there is a perfect passenger-conductor relationship; it couldn't be better. The tram moved down toward the river; it was a great life.

Enrico Gnei got off downtown and went to a café. Not the usual one. A café with mosaic walls. It had just opened; the cashier hadn't arrived yet; the counterman was starting up the coffee machine. Gnei strode like a master right to the center of the place, went to the counter, ordered a coffee, chose a cake from the glass pastry case, and bit into it, first with hunger, then with the expression of a man with a bad taste in his mouth after a wild night.

A newspaper lay open on the counter; Gnei glanced at it. He hadn't bought the paper this morning—and to think that that was always the first thing he did on leaving his



* * *



house. He was a habitual reader, meticulous; he kept up with the most trivial events and there wasn't a page he skipped without reading. But that day his gaze ran over the headlines and his thoughts remained unconnected. Gnei couldn't manage to read: perhaps—who knows?—stirred by the food, by the hot coffee, or by the dulling of the morning air's effect, a wave of sensations from the night came over him. He shut his eyes, raised his chin, and smiled.

Attributing this pleased expression to the sports news in the paper, the counterman said to him, "Ah, you're glad Boc-cadasse will be playing again on Sunday?" and he pointed to the headline that announced the return of a center-half. Gnei read, recovered himself, and instead of exclaiming, as he would have liked to, "Oh, I've got something a lot better than Boccadasse to think about, my friend!" he confined himself to saying, "Hmm ... right ..." And, unwilling to let a conversation about the forthcoming match disrupt the flow of his feelings, he turned toward the cashier's desk, where, in the meantime, a young girl with a disenchanted look had installed herself.

"So," Gnei said, in a tone of intimacy, "I owe you for a coffee and a cake." The cashier yawned. "Sleepy? Too early for you?" Gnei asked. Without smiling, the cashier nodded. Gnei assumed an air of complicity: "Aha! Didn't get enough sleep last night, did you?" He thought for a moment, then, persuading himself he was with a person who would understand, added, "I still haven't gone to bed." Then he was silent, enigmatic, discreet. He paid, said good morning to all, and left. He went to the barber's.

"Good morning, sir. Have a seat, sir," the barber said in a professional falsetto that to Enrico Gnei was like a wink of the eye.



* * *



"Um hum, give me a shave!" he replied with skeptical condescension, looking at himself in the mirror. His face, with the towel knotted around his neck, had the appearance of an independent object, and some trace of weariness, no longer corrected by the general bearing of his person, was beginning to show. It was still quite a normal face, like that of a traveler who had got off the train at dawn, or a gambler who has spent the night over his cards; except there was a certain look that marked the special nature of his weariness—Gnei observed smugly—a certain relaxed, indulgent expression, that of a man who has had his share of things and is prepared to take the bad with the good.

Far different caresses—Gnei's cheeks seemed to say to the brush that encased them in warm foam—far different caresses from yours are what we're used to!

Scrape, razor—his skin seemed to say—you won't scrape off what I have felt and know!

It was, for Gnei, as if a conversation filled with allusions were taking place between him and the barber, who, however, was also silent, devoting himself to handling his implements. He was a young barber, somewhat taciturn more from lack of imagination than from a reserved character; and in fact, attempting to start a conversation, he said, "Some year, eh? The good weather's already here. Spring ..."

The remark reached Gnei right in the middle of his imaginary conversation, and the word "spring" became charged with meanings and hidden references. "Aaah! Spring ..." he said, a knowing smile on his foamy lips. And here the conversation died.

But Gnei felt the need to talk, to express, to communicate, and the barber didn't say anything further. Two or three times Gnei started to open his mouth when the young man lifted



* * *



the razor, but he couldn't find any words, and the razor descended again over his lip and chin.

"What did you say?" the barber asked, having seen Gnei's lips move without producing any sound.

And Gnei, with all his warmth, said, "Sunday, Bocca-dasse'll be back with the team!"

He had almost shouted; the other customers turned toward him their half-lathered faces; the barber had remained with his razor suspended in air.

"Ah, you're a - fan?" he said, a bit mortified. "I'm a

follower of -," and he named the city's other team.

"Oh, - has an easy game Sunday; they can't lose. ..."

But his warmth was already extinguished.

Shaven, he came outside. The city was loud and bustling; there were glints of gold on the windows, water flew over the fountains, the trams' poles struck sparks from the overhead wires. Enrico Gnei proceeded as if on the crest of a wave, bursts of vigor alternating in his heart with fits of lassitude.

"Why, it's Gnei!"

"Why, it's Bardetta!"

He ran into an old schoolmate he hadn't seen for ten years. They traded the usual remarks, how time had gone by, how they hadn't changed. Actually, Bardetta had somewhat faded, and the vulpine, slightly crafty expression of his face had become accentuated. Gnei knew that Bardetta was in business, but had a rather murky record and had been living abroad for some time.

"Still in Paris?"

"Venezuela. I'm about to go back. What about you?"

"Still here," and, in spite of himself, he smiled in embarrassment, as if he were ashamed of his sedentary life, and at



* * *



the same time irked because he couldn't make it clear, at first sight, that his existence in reality was fuller and more satisfied than might be imagined.

"Are you married?" Bardetta asked.

To Gnei this seemed an opportunity to rectify the first impression. "Bachelor!" he said. "Still a bachelor, ha ha! We're a vanishing race!" Yes, Bardetta, a man without scruples, about to leave again for America, with no ties now to the city and its gossip, was the ideal person; with him Gnei could give free rein to his euphoria, to him alone Gnei could confide his secret. Indeed, he could even exaggerate a little, talk of last night's adventure as if it were, for him, something habitual. "That's right," he insisted. "The old guard of bachelorhood, us two, eh?"—meaning to refer to Bardetta's onetime reputation as a successful chaser of chorus girls. And he was already studying the remark he would make to arrive at the subject, something on the order of "Why, only last night, for example..."

"To tell the truth," Bardetta said, with a somewhat shy smile, "I'm married and have four children. ..."

Gnei heard this as he was re-creating around himself the atmosphere of a completely heedless, epicurean world; and he was thrown a bit off balance by it. He stared at Bardetta; only then did he notice the man's shabby, downtrodden look, his worried, tired manner. "Ah, four children ..." he said, in a dull voice. "Congratulations! And how are things going over there?"

"Hmph ... not much doing ... It's the same all over. ... Scraping by ... feeding the family ..." and he stretched out his arms in a gesture of defeat.

Gnei, with his instinctive humility, felt compassion and



* * *



remorse: how could he have thought of trumpeting his own good luck to impress a wreck of a man like this? "Oh, here, too, I can tell you," he said quickly, changing his tone again, "we barely manage, living from day to day. ..."

"Well, let's hope things will get better. ..."

"Yes, we have to keep hoping. ..."

They exchanged all best wishes, said good-bye, and went off in different directions. Immediately, Gnei felt overwhelmed with regret: the possibility of confiding in Bardetta, that Bar-detta he had first imagined, seemed to him an immense boon, now lost forever. Between the two of them—Gnei thought— a man-to-man conversation could have taken place, good-natured, a shade ironic, without any showing off, without boasting; his friend would have left for America bearing a memory that would remain unchangeable; and Gnei vaguely saw himself preserved in the thoughts of that imaginary Bardetta, there in his Venezuela, remembering old Europe—poor, but always faithful to the cult of beauty and pleasure—and thinking instinctively of his friend, the schoolmate seen again after so many years, always with that prudent appearance and yet completely sure of himself: the man who hadn't abandoned Europe and virtually symbolized its ancient wisdom of life, its wary passions. ... Gnei grew excited: thus the adventure of the previous night could have left a mark, taken on a definitive meaning, instead of vanishing like sand in a sea of empty days, all alike.

Perhaps he should have talked about it to Bardetta anyway, even if Bardetta was a poor wretch with other things on his mind, even at the cost of humiliating him. Besides, how could he be sure that Bardetta really was a failure? Perhaps he just said that and he was still the old fox he had been in



* * *



the past. ... I'll overtake him—Gnei thought—I'll start a conversation, and I'll tell him.

He ran ahead along the sidewalk, turned into the square, proceeded under the arcade. Bardetta had disappeared. Gnei looked at the time; he was late; he hurried toward his job. To calm himself, he decided that this telling others about his affairs, like a schoolboy, was too alien to his character, his ways; this was why he had refrained from doing it. Thus reconciled with himself, his pride restored, he punched the time clock at the office.

For his job, Gnei harbored that amorous passion that, though unconfessed, makes clerks' hearts warm, once they come to know the secret sweetness and the furious fanaticism that can charge the most habitual bureaucratic routine, the answering of indifferent correspondence, the precise keeping of a ledger. Perhaps this morning his unconscious hope was that amorous stimulation and clerkish passion would become a single thing, merge one with the other, to go on burning and never be extinguished. But the sight of his desk, the familiar look of a pale-green folder with "Pending" written on it, sufficed to make him feel the sharp contrast between the dizzying beauty from which he had just parted and his usual days.

He walked around the desk several times, without sitting down. He had been overwhelmed by a sudden, urgent love for the beautiful lady, and he could find no rest. He went into the next office, where the accountants, careful and dissatisfied, were tapping on their adding machines.

He began walking past each of them, saying hello, nervously cheery, sly, basking in the memory, without hopes for the present, mad with love among the accountants. As I move



* * *



now in your midst, in your office—he was thinking—so I was turning in her blankets, not long ago. "Yes, that's right, Mari-notti!" he said, banging his fist on a fellow clerk's papers.

Marinotti raised his eyeglasses and asked slowly, "Say, did they take an extra four thousand lire out of your salary this month, too, Gnei?"

"No, my friend, in February," Gnei began, and at the same time he recalled a movement the lady had made, late, in the morning hours, that to him had seemed a new revelation and opened immense, unknown possibilities of love—"no, they already deducted mine then," he went on, in a mild voice, and he moved his hand gently before him, in mid-air, pursing his lips. "They took the whole amount from my February pay, Marinotti." He would have liked to add further details and explanations, just to keep talking, but he wasn't able to.

This is the secret—he decided, going back to his office— at every moment, in everything I do or say, everything I have experienced must be implicit. But he was consumed by an anxiety that he could never live up to what he had been, could never succeed in expressing, with hints, or still less with explicit words, and perhaps not even with his thoughts, the fullness he knew he had reached.

The telephone rang. It was the general manager. He was asking for the background on the Giuseppieri complaint.

"It's like this, sir," Gnei explained over the telephone. "Giuseppieri and Company, on the sixth of March ..." and he wanted to say: You see, when she slowly said, "Are you going?" I realized I shouldn't let go of her hand. ...

"Yes, sir, the complaint was in reference to goods previously billed ..." and he thought to say: Until the door closed behind us, I still wasn't sure. ...



* * *



"No," he explained, "the claim wasn't made through the local office ..." and he meant: But only then did I realize that she was entirely different from the way I had imagined her, so cold and haughty. ...

He hung up. His brow was beaded with sweat. He felt tired now, burdened with sleep. It had been a mistake not to go by the house and freshen up, change: even the clothes he was wearing irked him.

He went to the window. There was a large courtyard surrounded by high walls full of balconies, but it was like being in a desert. The sky could be seen above the roofs, no longer limpid, but bleached, covered by an opaque patina, as in Gnei's memory an opaque whiteness was wiping out every memory of sensations, and the presence of the sun was marked by a vague, still patch of light, like a secret pang of grief.



* * *



THE ADVENTURE OF A PHOTOGRAPHER

When spring comes, the city's inhabitants, by the hundreds of thousands, go out on Sundays with leather cases over their shoulders. And they photograph one another. They come back as happy as hunters with bulging game bags; they spend days waiting, with sweet anxiety, to see the developed pictures (anxiety to which some add the subtle pleasure of alchemistic manipulations in the darkroom, forbidding any intrusion by members of the family, relishing the acid smell that is harsh to the nostrils). It is only when they have the photos before their eyes that they seem to take tangible possession of the day they spent, only then that the mountain stream, the movement of the child with his pail, the glint of the sun on the wife's legs take on the irrevocability of what has been and can no longer be doubted. Everything else can drown in the unreliable shadow of memory.

Seeing a good deal of his friends and colleagues, Antonio Paraggi, a nonphotographer, sensed a growing isolation. Every week he discovered that the conversations of those who praise the sensitivity of a filter or discourse on the number of DINs were swelled by the voice of yet another to whom he



* * *



had confided until yesterday, convinced that they were shared, his sarcastic remarks about an activity that to him seemed so unexciting, so lacking in surprises.

Professionally, Antonino Paraggi occupied an executive position in the distribution department of a production firm, but his real passion was commenting to his friends on current events large and small, unraveling the thread of general causes from the tangle of details; in short, by mental attitude he was a philosopher, and he devoted all his thoroughness to grasping the significance of even the events most remote from his own experience. Now he felt that something in the essence of photographic man was eluding him, the secret appeal that made new adepts continue to join the ranks of the amateurs of the lens, some boasting of the progress of their technical and artistic skill, others, on the contrary, giving all the credit to the efficiency of the camera they had purchased, which was capable (according to them) of producing masterpieces even when operated by inept hands (as they declared their own to be, because wherever pride aimed at magnifying the virtues of mechanical devices, subjective talent accepted a proportionate humiliation). Antonino Paraggi understood that neither the one nor the other motive of satisfaction was decisive : the secret lay elsewhere.

It must be said that his examination of photography to discover the causes of a private dissatisfaction—as of someone who feels excluded from something—was to a certain extent a trick Antonino played on himself, to avoid having to consider another, more evident, process that was separating him from his friends. What was happening was this: his acquaintances, of his age, were all getting married, one after another, and starting families, while Antonino remained a bachelor.



* * *



Yet between the two phenomena there was undoubtedly a connection, inasmuch as the passion for the lens often develops in a natural, virtually physiological way as a secondary effect of fatherhood. One of the first instincts of parents, after they have brought a child into the world, is to photograph it. Given the speed of growth, it becomes necessary to photograph the child often, because nothing is more fleeting and unmemorable than a six-month-old infant, soon deleted and replaced by one of eight months, and then one of a year; and all the perfection that, to the eyes of parents, a child of three may have reached cannot prevent its being destroyed by that of the four-year-old. The photograph album remains the only place where all these fleeting perfections are saved and juxtaposed, each aspiring to an incomparable absoluteness of its own. In the passion of new parents for framing their offspring in the sights to reduce them to the immobility of black-and-white or a full-color slide, the nonphotographer and non-procreator Antonino saw chiefly a phase in the race toward madness lurking in that black instrument. But his reflections on the iconography-family-madness nexus were summary and reticent: otherwise he would have realized that the person actually running the greatest risk was himself, the bachelor. In the circle of Antonino's friends, it was customary to spend the weekend out of town, in a group, following a tradition that for many of them dated back to their student days and that had been extended to include their girl friends, then their wives and their children, as well as wet nurses and governesses, and in some cases in-laws and new acquaintances of both sexes. But since the continuity of their habits, their getting together, had never lapsed, Antonino could pretend that nothing had changed with the passage of the years and that



* * *



they were still the band of young men and women of the old days, rather than a conglomerate of families in which he remained the only surviving bachelor.

More and more often, on these excursions to the sea or the mountains, when it came time for the family group or the multi-family picture, an outsider was asked to lend a hand, a passer-by perhaps, willing to press the button of the camera already focused and aimed in the desired direction. In these cases, Antonino couldn't refuse his services: he would take the camera from the hands of a father or a mother, who would then run to assume his or her place in the second row, sticking his head forward between two other heads, or crouching among the little ones; and Antonino, concentrating all his strength in the finger destined for this use, would press. The first times, an awkward stiffening of his arm would make the lens veer to capture the masts of ships or the spires of steeples, or to decapitate grandparents, uncles, and aunts. He was accused of doing this on purpose, reproached for making a joke in poor taste. It wasn't true: his intention was to lend the use of his finger as docile instrument of the collective wish, but also to exploit his temporary position of privilege to admonish both photographers and their subjects as to the significance of their actions. As soon as the pad of his finger reached the desired condition of detachment from the rest of his person and personality, he was free to communicate his theories in well-reasoned discourse, framing at the same time well-composed little groups. (A few accidental successes had sufficed to give him nonchalance and assurance with view-finders and light meters.)

"... Because once you've begun," he would preach, "there is no reason why you should stop. The line between the reality



* * *



that is photographed because it seems beautiful to us and the reality that seems beautiful because it has been photographed is very narrow. If you take a picture of Pierluca because he's building a sand castle, there is no reason not to take his picture while he's crying because the castle has collapsed, and then while the nurse consoles him by helping him find a sea shell in the sand. The minute you start saying something, 'Ah, how beautiful! We must photograph it!' you are already close to the view of the person who thinks that everything that is not photographed is lost, as if it had never existed, and that therefore, in order really to live, you must photograph as much as you can, and to photograph as much as you can you must either live in the most photograph-able way possible, or else consider photographable every moment of your life. The first course leads to stupidity; the second to madness."

"You're the one who's mad and stupid," his friends would say to him, "and a pain in the ass, into the bargain."

"For the person who wants to capture everything that passes before his eyes," Antonino would explain, even if nobody was listening to him any more, "the only coherent way to act is to snap at least one picture a minute, from the instant he opens his eyes in the morning to when he goes to sleep. This is the only way that the rolls of exposed film will represent a faithful diary of our days, with nothing left out. If I were to start taking pictures, I'd see this thing through, even if it meant losing my mind. But the rest of you still insist on making a choice. What sort of choice? A choice in the idyllic sense, apologetic, consolatory, at peace with nature, the fatherland, the family. Your choice isn't only photographic; it is a choice of life, which leads you to exclude dramatic conflicts, the knots



* * *



of contradiction, the great tensions of will, passion, aversion. So you think you are saving yourselves from madness, but you are falling into mediocrity, into hebetude."

A girl named Bice, someone's ex-sister-in-law, and another named Lydia, someone else's ex-secretary, asked him please to take a snapshot of them while they were playing ball among the waves. He consented, but since in the meanwhile he had worked out a theory in opposition to snapshots, he dutifully expressed it to the two friends:

"What drives you two girls to cut from the mobile continuum of your day these temporal slices, the thickness of a second? Tossing the ball back and forth, you are living in the present, but the moment the scansion of the frames is insinuated between your acts it is no longer the pleasure of the game that motivates you but, rather, that of seeing yourselves again in the future, of rediscovering yourselves in twenty years' time, on a piece of yellowed cardboard (yellowed emotionally, even if modern printing procedures will preserve it unchanged). The taste for the spontaneous, natural, lifelike snapshot kills spontaneity, drives away the present. Photographed reality immediately takes on a nostalgic character, of joy fled on the wings of time, a commemorative quality, even if the picture was taken the day before yesterday. And the life that you live in order to photograph it is already, at the outset, a commemoration of itself. To believe that the snapshot is more true than the posed portrait is a prejudice. ..."

So saying, Antonino darted around the two girls in the water, to focus on the movements of their game and cut out of the picture the dazzling glints of the sun on the water. In a scuffle for the ball, Bice, flinging herself on the other girl, who was submerged, was snapped with her behind in close-up,



* * *



flying over the waves. Antonino, so as not to lose this angle, had flung himself back in the water while holding up the camera, nearly drowning.

"They all came out well, and this one's stupendous," they commented a few days later, snatching the proofs from each other. They had arranged to meet at the photography shop. "You're good; you must take some more of us."

Antonino had reached the conclusion that it was necessary to return to posed subjects, in attitudes denoting their social position and their character, as in the nineteenth century. His antiphotographic polemic could be fought only from within the black box, setting one kind of photography against another.

"I'd like to have one of those old box cameras," he said to his girl friends, "the kind you put on a tripod. Do you think it's still possible to find one?"

"Hmm, maybe at some junk shop ..."

"Let s go see."

The girls found it amusing to hunt for this curious object; together they ransacked flea markets, interrogated old street photographers, followed them to their lairs. In those cemeteries of objects no longer serviceable lay wooden columns, screens, backdrops with faded landscapes; everything that suggested an old photographer's studio, Antonino bought. In the end he managed to get hold of a box camera, with a bulb to squeeze. It seemed in perfect working order. Antonino also bought an assortment of plates. With the girls helping him, he set up the studio in a room of his apartment, all fitted out with old-fashioned equipment, except for two modern spotlights.

Now he was content. "This is where to start," he explained



* * *



to the girls. "In the way our grandparents assumed a pose, in the convention that decided how groups were to be arranged, there was a social meaning, a custom, a taste, a culture. An official photograph, or one of a marriage or a family or a school group, conveyed how serious and important each role or institution was, but also how far they were all false or forced, authoritarian, hierarchical. This is the point: to make explicit the relationship with the world that each of us bears within himself, and which today we tend to hide, to make unconscious, believing that in this way it disappears, whereas ..."

"Who do you want to have pose for you?"

"You two come tomorrow, and I'll begin by taking some pictures of you in the way I mean."

"Say, what's in the back of your mind?" Lydia asked, suddenly suspicious. Only now, as the studio was all set up, did she see that everything about it had a sinister, threatening air. "If you think we're going to come and be your models, you're dreaming!"

Bice giggled with her, but the next day she came back to Antonino's apartment, alone.

She was wearing a white linen dress with colored embroidery on the edges of the sleeves and pockets. Her hair was parted and gathered over her temples. She laughed, a bit slyly, bending her head to one side. As he let her in, Antonino studied her manner—a bit coy, a bit ironic—to discover what were the traits that defined her true character.

He made her sit in a big armchair, and stuck his head under the black cloth that came with his camera. It was one of those boxes whose rear wall was of glass, where the image is reflected as if already on the plate, ghostly, a bit



* * *



milky, deprived of every link with space and time. To Antonino it was as if he had never seen Bice before. She had a docility in her somewhat heavy way of lowering her eyelids, of stretching her neck forward, that promised something hidden, as her smile seemed to hide behind the very act of smiling.

"There. Like that. No, head a bit farther; raise your eyes. No, lower them." Antonino was pursuing, within that box, something of Bice that all at once seemed most precious to him, absolute.

"Now you're casting a shadow; move into the light. No, it was better before."

There were many possible photographs of Bice and many Bices impossible to photograph, but what he was seeking was the unique photograph that would contain both the former and the latter.

"I can't get you," his voice emerged, stifled and complaining from beneath the black hood, "I can't get you any more; I can't manage to get you."

He freed himself from the cloth and straightened up again. He was going about it all wrong. That expression, that accent, that secret he seemed on the very point of capturing in her face, was something that drew him into the quicksands of moods, humors, psychology: he, too, was one of those who pursue life as it flees, a hunter of the unattainable, like the takers of snapshots.

He had to follow the opposite path : aim at a portrait completely on the surface, evident, unequivocal, that did not elude conventional appearance, the stereotype, the mask. The mask, being first of all a social, historical product, contains more truth than any image claiming to be "true"; it bears a quan-



* * *



tity of meanings that will gradually be revealed. Wasn't this precisely Antonino's intention in setting up this fair booth of a studio?

He observed Bice. He should start with the exterior elements of her appearance. In Bice's way of dressing and fixing herself up—he thought—you could recognize the somewhat nostalgic, somewhat ironic intention, widespread in the mode of those years, to hark back to the fashions of thirty years earlier. The photograph should underline this intention: why hadn't he thought of that?

Antonino went to find a tennis racket; Bice should stand up in a three-quarter turn, the racket under her arm, her face in the pose of a sentimental postcard. To Antonino, from under the black drape, Bice's image—in its slimness and suitability to the pose, and in the unsuitable and almost incongruous aspects that the pose accentuated—seemed very interesting. He made her change position several times, studying the geometry of legs and arms in relation to the racket and to some element in the background. (In the ideal postcard in his mind there would have been the net of the tennis court, but you couldn't demand too much, and Antonino made do with a Ping-Pong table.)

But he still didn't feel on safe ground: wasn't he perhaps trying to photograph memories—or, rather, vague echoes of recollection surfacing in the memory? Wasn't his refusal to live the present as a future memory, as the Sunday photographers did, leading him to attempt an equally unreal operation, namely to give a body to recollection, to substitute it for the present before his very eyes?

"Move! Don't stand there like a stick! Raise the racket, damn it! Pretend you're playing tennis!" All of a sudden he



* * *



was furious. He had realized that only by exaggerating the poses could he achieve an objective alienness; only by feigning a movement arrested halfway could he give the impression of the unmoving, the nonliving.

Bice obediently followed his orders even when they became vague and contradictory, with a passivity that was also a way of declaring herself out of the game, and yet somehow insinuating, in this game that was not hers, the unpredictable moves of a mysterious match of her own. What Antonino now was expecting of Bice, telling her to put her legs and arms this way and that way, was not so much the simple performance of a plan as her response to the violence he was doing her with his demands, an unforeseeable aggressive reply to this violence that he was being driven more and more to wreak on her.

It was like a dream, Antonino thought, contemplating, from the darkness in which he was buried, that improbable tennis player filtered into the glass rectangle: like a dream when a presence coming from the depth of memory advances, is recognized, and then suddenly is transformed into something unexpected, something that even before the transformation is already frightening because there's no telling what it might be transformed into.

Did he want to photograph dreams? This suspicion struck him dumb, hidden in that ostrich refuge of his with the bulb in his hand, like an idiot; and meanwhile Bice, left to herself, continued a kind of grotesque dance, freezing in exaggerated tennis poses, backhand, drive, raising the racket high or lowering it to the ground as if the gaze coming from that glass eye were the ball she continued to slam back.

"Stop, what's this nonsense? This isn't what I had in mind."



* * *



Antonino covered the camera with the cloth and began pacing up and down the room.

It was all the fault of that dress, with its tennis, prewar connotations. ... It had to be admitted that if she wore a street dress the kind of photograph he described couldn't be taken. A certain solemnity was needed, a certain pomp, like the official photos of queens. Only in evening dress would Bice become a photographic subject, with the décolleté that marks a distinct line between the white of the skin and the darkness of the fabric, accentuated by the glitter of jewels, a boundary between an essence of woman, almost atemporal and almost impersonal in her nakedness, and the other abstraction, social this time, the dress, symbol of an equally impersonal role, like the drapery of an allegorical statue.

He approached Bice, began to unbutton the dress at the neck and over the bosom, and slip it down over her shoulders. He had thought of certain nineteenth-century photographs of women in which from the white of the cardboard emerge the face, the neck, the line of the bared shoulders, while all the rest disappears into the whiteness.

This was the portrait outside of time and space that he now wanted; he wasn't quite sure how it was achieved, but he was determined to succeed. He set the spotlight on Bice, moved the camera closer, fiddled around under the cloth adjusting the aperture of the lens. He looked into it. Bice was naked.

She had made the dress slip down to her feet; she wasn't wearing anything underneath it; she had taken a step forward—no, a step backward, which was as if her whole body were advancing in the picture; she stood erect, tall before the camera, calm, looking straight ahead, as if she were alone.



* * *



Antonino felt the sight of her enter his eyes and occupy the whole visual field, removing it from the flux of casual and fragmentary images, concentrating time and space in a finite form. And as if this visual surprise and the impression of the plate were two reflexes connected among themselves, he immediately pressed the bulb, loaded the camera again, snapped, put in another plate, snapped, and went on changing plates and snapping, mumbling, stifled by the cloth, "There, that's right now, yes, again, I'm getting you fine now, another."

He had run out of plates. He emerged from the cloth. He was pleased. Bice was before him, naked, as if waiting.

"Now you can dress," he said, euphoric, but already in a hurry. "Let's go out."

She looked at him, bewildered.

"I've got you now," he said.

Bice burst into tears.

Antonino realized that he had fallen in love with her that same day. They started living together, and he bought the most modern cameras, telescopic lens, the most advanced equipment; he installed a darkroom. He even had a set-up for photographing her when she was asleep at night. Bice would wake at the flash, annoyed; Antonino went on taking snapshots of her disentangling herself from sleep, of her becoming furious with him, of her trying in vain to find sleep again by plunging her face into the pillow, of her making up with him, of her recognizing as acts of love these photographic rapes.

In Antonino's darkroom, strung with films and proofs, Bice peered from every frame, as thousands of bees peer out from the honeycomb of a hive, but always the same bee: Bice in every attitude, at every angle, in every guise, Bice posed or



* * *



caught unaware, an identity fragmented into a powder of images.

"But what's this obsession with Bice? Can't you photograph anything else?" was the question he heard constandy from his friends, and also from her.

"It isn't just a matter of Bice," he answered. "It's a question of method. Whatever person you decide to photograph, or whatever thing, you must go on photographing it always, exclusively, at every hour of the day and night. Photography has a meaning only if it exhausts all possible images."

But he didn't say what meant most to him: to catch Bice in the street when she didn't know he was watching her, to keep her in the range of hidden lenses, to photograph her not only without letting himself be seen but without seeing her, to surprise her as she was in the absence of his gaze, of any gaze. Not that he wanted to discover any particular thing; he wasn't a jealous man in the usual sense of the word. It was an invisible Bice that he wanted to possess, a Bice absolutely alone, a Bice whose presence presupposed the absence of him and everyone else.

Whether or not it could be defined as jealousy, it was, in any case, a passion difficult to put up with. And soon Bice left him.

Antonino sank into deep depression. He began to keep a diary—a photographic diary, of course. With the camera slung around his neck, shut up in the house, slumped in an armchair, he compulsively snapped pictures as he stared into the void. He was photographing the absence of Bice.

He collected the photographs in an album: you could see ashtrays brimming with cigarette butts, an unmade bed, a damp stain on the wall. He got the idea of composing a cata-



* * *



logue of everything in the world that resists photography, that is systematically omitted from the visual field not only by cameras but also by human beings. On every subject he spent days, using up whole rolls at intervals of hours, so as to follow the changes of light and shadow. One day he became obsessed with a completely empty corner of the room, containing a radiator pipe and nothing else: he was tempted to go on photographing that spot and only that till the end of his days.

The apartment was completely neglected; old newspapers, letters lay crumpled on the floor, and he photographed them. The photographs in the papers were photographed as well, and an indirect bond was established between his lens and that of distant news photographers. To produce those black spots the lenses of other cameras had been aimed at police assaults, charred automobiles, running athletes, ministers, defendants.

Antonino now felt a special pleasure in portraying domestic objects framed by a mosaic of telephotos, violent patches of ink on white sheets. From his immobility he was surprised to find he envied the life of the news photographer, who moves following the movements of crowds, bloodshed, tears, feasts, crime, the conventions of fashion, the falsity of official ceremonies; the news photographer, who documents the extremes of society, the richest and the poorest, the exceptional moments that are nevertheless produced at every moment and in every place.

Does this mean that only the exceptional condition has a meaning? Antonino asked himself. Is the news photographer the true antagonist of the Sunday photographer? Are their worlds mutually exclusive? Or does the one give meaning to the other?



* * *



Reflecting like this, he began to tear up the photographs with Bice or without Bice that had accumulated during the months of his passion, ripping to pieces the strips of proofs hung on the walls, snipping up the celluloid of the negatives, jabbing the slides, and piling the remains of this methodical destruction on newspapers spread out on the floor.

Perhaps true, total photography, he thought, is a pile of fragments of private images, against the creased background of massacres and coronations.

He folded the corners of the newspapers into a huge bundle to be thrown into the trash, but first he wanted to photograph it. He arranged the edges so that you could clearly see two halves of photographs from different newspapers that in the bundle happened, by chance, to fit together. In fact he reopened the package a little so that a bit of shiny pasteboard would stick out, the fragment of a torn enlargement. He turned on a spotlight; he wanted it to be possible to recognize in his photograph the half-crumpled and torn images, and at the same time to feel their unreality as casual, inky shadows, and also at the same time their concreteness as objects charged with meaning, the strength with which they clung to the attention that tried to drive them away.

To get all this into one photograph he had to acquire an extraordinary technical skill, but only then would Antonino quit taking pictures. Having exhausted every possibility, at the moment when he was coming full circle Antonino realized that photographing photographs was the only course that he had left—or, rather, the true course he had obscurely been seeking all this time.



* * *



THE ADVENTURE OF A TRAVELER

Federico V., who lived in a northern Italian city, was in love with Cinzia U., a resident of Rome. Whenever his work permitted, he would take the train to the capital. Accustomed to budgeting his time strictly, at the job and in his pleasures, he always traveled at night: there was one train, the last, that was not crowded—except in the holiday season—and Federico could stretch out and sleep.

Federico's days in his own city went by nervously, like the hours of someone between trains who, as he goes about his business, cannot stop thinking of the schedule. But when the evening of his departure finally came and his tasks were done and he was walking with his suitcase toward the station, then, even in his haste to avoid missing his train, he began to feel a sense of inner calm pervade him. It was as if all the bustle around the station—now at its last gasp, given the late hour— were part of a natural movement, and he also belonged to it. Everything seemed to be there to encourage him, to give a spring to his steps like the rubberized pavement of the station, and even the obstacles—the wait, his minutes numbered, at the last ticket window still open, the difficulty of breaking a



* * *



large bill, the lack of small change at the newsstand—seemed to exist for his pleasure in confronting and overcoming them.

Not that he betrayed any sign of this mood: a staid man, he liked being undistinguishable from the many travelers arriving and leaving, all in overcoats like him, a case in hand; and yet he felt as if he were borne on the crest of a wave, because he was rushing toward Cinzia.

The hand in his overcoat pocket toyed with a telephone token. Tomorrow morning, as soon as he landed at the Stazione Termini in Rome, he would run, token in hand, to the nearest public telephone, dial the number, and say, "Hello, darling, I'm here. ..." And he clutched the token as if it were a most precious object, the only one in the world, the sole tangible proof of what awaited him on his arrival.

The trip was expensive and Federico wasn't rich. If he saw a second-class coach with padded seats and empty compartments, Federico would buy a second-class ticket. Or, rather, he always bought a second-class ticket, with the idea that, if he found too many people there, he would move into first, paying the difference to the conductor. In this operation, he enjoyed the pleasure of economy (besides, when the cost of first-class was paid in two installments, and through necessity, it upset him less), the satisfaction of profiting by his own experience, and a sense of freedom and expansiveness in his actions and in his thoughts.

As sometimes happens with men whose lives are more conditioned by others, exterior, poured out, Federico tended constantly to defend his own inner concentration, and actually it took very little, a hotel room, a train compartment all to himself, for him to adjust the world into harmony with his life; the world seemed created specially for him, as if the rail-



* * *



roads that swathed the peninsula had been built deliberately to bear him triumphantly toward Cinzia. That evening, again, second-class was almost empty. Every sign was favorable.

Federico V. chose an empty compartment, not over the wheels but not too far into the coach, either, because he knew that as a rule people who board a train in haste tend to reject the first few compartments. The defense of the space necessary to stretch out and travel lying down is made up of tiny psychological devices; Federico knew them and employed them all. For example, he drew the curtains over the door, an act that, performed at this point, might even seem excessive; but it aimed, in fact, at a psychological effect. Seeing those drawn curtains, the traveler who arrives later is almost always overcome by an instinctive scruple and prefers, if he can find it, a compartment with perhaps two or three people in it already but with the curtains open. Federico strewed his bag, overcoat, newspapers on the seats opposite and beside him. Another elementary move, abused and apparently futile but actually of use. Not that he wanted to make people believe those places were occupied: such a subterfuge would have been contrary to his civic conscience and to his sincere nature. He wanted only to create a rapid impression of a cluttered, not very inviting compartment, a simple, rapid impression.

He sat down and heaved a sigh of relief. He had learned that being in a setting where everything can only be in its place, the same as always, anonymous, without possible surprises, filled him with calm, with self-awareness, freedom of thought. His whole life rushed along in disorder, but now he found the perfect balance between interior stimulus and the impassive neutrality of material things.

It lasted an instant (if he was in second; a minute if he



* * *



was in first); then he was immediately seized by a pang: the squalor of the compartment, the plush threadbare in places, the suspicion of dust all about, the faded texture of the curtains in the old-style coaches, gave him a sensation of sadness, the uneasy prospect of sleeping in his clothes, on a bunk not his, with no possible intimacy between him and what he touched. But he immediately recalled the reason he was traveling, and he felt caught up again in that natural rhythm, as of the sea or the wind, that festive, light impulse; he had only to seek it within himself, closing his eyes or clasping the telephone token in his hand, and that sense of squalor was defeated; only he existed, alone, facing the adventure of his journey.

But something was still missing: what? Ah: he heard the bass voice approaching under the marquee: "Pillows!" He had already stood up, was lowering the window, extending his hand with the two hundred-lire pieces, shouting, "I'll take one!" It was the pillow man who, every time, gave the journey its starting signal. He passed by the window a minute before departure, pushing in front of him the wheeled rack with pillows hanging from it. He was a tall old man, thin, with white mustache and large hands, long, thick fingers: hands that inspire trust. He was dressed all in black: military cap, uniform, overcoat, a scarf wound tight around his neck. A character from the times of King Umberto; perhaps an old colonel, or only a faithful quartermaster sergeant. Or a postman, an old rural messenger: with those big hands, when he extended the thin pillow to Federico, holding it with his fingertips, he seemed to be delivering a letter, or perhaps to be posting it through the window. The pillow now was in Federico's arms, square, flat, just like an envelope, and, what's



* * *



more, covered with postmarks : it was the daily letter to Cinzia, also departing this evening, and instead of the page of eager scrawl there was Federico in person to take the invisible path of the night mail, through the hand of the old winter messenger, the last incarnation of the rational, disciplined North before the incursion among the unruly passions of the Center-South.

But still, and above all, it was a pillow; namely, a soft object (though pressed and compact) and white (though covered with postmarks) from the steam laundry. It contained in itself, as a concept is enclosed within an ideographic sign, the idea of the bed, the twisting and turning, the privacy; and Federico was already anticipating with pleasure the island of freshness it would be for him, that night, amid that rough and treacherous plush. And further: that slender rectangle of comfort prefigured later comforts, later intimacy, later sweetnesses, whose enjoyment was the reason he was setting out on this journey; indeed, the very fact of departing, the hiring of the cushion, was a form of enjoying them, a way of entering the dimension where Cinzia reigned, the circle enclosed by her soft arms.

And it was with an amorous, caressing motion that the train began to glide among the columns of the marquees, snaking through the iron-clad fields of the switches, hurling itself into the darkness, and becoming one with the impulse that till then Federico had felt within himself. And as if the release of his tension in the speeding of the train had made him lighter, he began to accompany its race, humming the tune of a song that this speed brought to his mind: "fai deux amours. ... Mon pays et Paris ... Paris toujours ..."

A man entered; Federico fell silent. "Is this place free?" He sat down. Federico had already made a quick mental cal-



* * *



culation : strictly speaking, if you want to make your journey lying down, it's best to have someone else in the compartment, one person stretched out on one side and the other on the other, for then nobody dares disturb you; but if, on the other hand, half the compartment remains free, when you least expect it a family of six boards the train, complete with children, all bound for Siracusa, and you're forced to sit up. Federico was quite aware, then, that the wisest thing to do, on entering an uncrowded train, was to take a seat not in an empty compartment but in a compartment where there was already one traveler. But he never did this: he preferred to aim at total solitude, and when, through no choice of his, he acquired a traveling companion, he could always console himself with the advantages of the new situation.

And so he did now. "Are you going to Rome?" he asked the newcomer, so that he could then add: Fine, let's draw the curtains, turn off the light, and nobody else will come in. But instead the man answered, "No, Genoa." It would be fine for him to get off at Genoa and leave Federico alone again, but for a few hours' journey he wouldn't want to stretch out, would probably remain awake, wouldn't allow the light to be turned off; and other people could come in at the stations along the way. Thus Federico had the disadvantages of traveling in company, with none of the corresponding advantages.

But he didn't dwell on this. His forte had always been his ability to dismiss from the area of his thoughts any aspect of reality that upset him or was of no use to him. He erased the man seated in the corner opposite his, reduced him to a shadow, a gray patch. The newspapers that both held open before their faces assisted the reciprocal impermeability.



* * *



Federico could go on soaring in his amorous flight. "Paris toujours ..." No one could imagine that in that sordid setting of people coming and going, driven by necessity and by forbearance, he was flying to the arms of a woman the like of Cinzia U. And to feed this sense of pride, Federico felt impelled to consider his traveling companion (at whom he had not even glanced so far) to compare—with the cruelty of the nouveau riche—his own fortunate state with the grayness of other existences.

The stranger, however, didn't look the least downcast. He was still a young man, sturdy, hefty; his manner was satisfied, active; he was reading a sports magazine and had a large suitcase at his side. He looked, in other words, like the agent for some firm, a commercial traveler. For a moment, Federico V. was gripped by the feeling of envy always inspired in him by people who seemed more practical and vital than he; but it was the impression of a moment, which he immediately dismissed, thinking: He's a man who travels in corrugated iron, or paints, whereas I ... And he was seized again by that desire to sing, in a release of euphoria, clearing his mind. "Je voyage en amour!" he warbled in his mind, to the earlier rhythm that he felt harmonized with the race of the train, adapting words specially invented to enrage the salesman, if he could have heard them. "Je voyage en volupté!," underlining as much as he could the lilt and the languor of the tune, "Je voyage toujours ... l'hiver et l'été. ..." He was thus becoming more and more worked up—"l'hiver et ... l'été!"—to such a degree that a smile of complete mental beatitude must have appeared on his lips. At that moment he realized the salesman was staring at him.

He promptly resumed his staid mien and concentrated on



* * *



reading his paper, denying even to himself that he had been caught a moment before in such a childish mood. Childish? Why? Nothing childish about it: his journey put him in a propitious condition of spirit, a condition characteristic, in fact, of the mature man, of the man who knows the good and the evil of life and is now preparing himself to enjoy, deservedly, the good. Serene, his conscience perfectly at peace, he leafed through the illustrated weeklies, shattered images of a fast, frantic life, in which he sought some of the same things that moved him. Soon he discovered that the magazines didn't interest him in the least, mere scribbles of immediacy, of the life that flows on the surface. His impatience was voyaging through loftier heavens. "L'hiver et ... l'été!" Now it was time to settle down to sleep.

He received an unexpected satisfaction: the salesman had fallen asleep sitting up, without changing position, the newspaper on his lap. Federico considered people who were capable of sleeping in a seated position with a sense of estrangement that didn't even manage to be envy: for him, sleeping on the train involved an elaborate procedure, a detailed ritual, but this, too, was precisely the arduous pleasure of his journeys.

First, he had to take off his good trousers and put on an old pair, so he wouldn't arrive all rumpled. The operation would take place in the W.C.; but before—to have greater freedom of movement—it was best to change his shoes for slippers. From his bag Federico took out his old trousers and the slipper bag, took off his shoes, put on the slippers, hid the shoes under the seat, went to the W.C. to change his trousers. "Je voyage toujours!" He came back, arranged his good trousers on the rack so they would keep their crease. "Trallala-la-la!" He placed the pillow at the end of the seat toward the cor-



* * *



ridor, because it was better to hear the sudden opening of the door above your head than to be struck by it visually as you suddenly opened your eyes. "Du voyage, je sais tout!" At the other end of the seat he put a newspaper, because he didn't lie down barefoot, but kept his slippers on. He hung his jacket from a hook over the pillow, and in one pocket he put his change purse and his money clip, which would have pressed against his leg if left in his trouser pocket. But he kept his ticket in the little pocket below his belt. "Je sais bien voyager. ..." He replaced his good sweater, so as not to wrinkle it, with an old one; he would change his shirt in the morning. The salesman, waking when Federico came back into the compartment, had followed his maneuvering as if not completely understanding what was going on. "Jusqu'à mon amour ..." He took off his tie and hung it up, took the celluloid stiffeners from his shirt collar and put them in a pocket of his jacket, along with his money. "... j'arrive avec le train!" He took off his suspenders (like all men devoted to an elegance not merely external, he wore suspenders) and his garters; he undid the top button of his trousers so they wouldn't be too tight over the belly. "Trallala-la-la!" He didn't put the jacket on again over his old pullover, but his overcoat instead, after having taken his house keys from the pocket; he left the precious token, though, with the heart-rending fetishism of a child who puts his favorite toy under the pillow. He buttoned up the overcoat completely, turned up the collar; if he was careful, he could sleep in it without leaving a wrinkle. "Main-tenant voilà!" Sleeping on the train meant waking with your hair all disheveled and maybe finding yourself in the station without even the time to comb it; so he pulled a beret all the way down on his head. "Je suits fret, alors?' He swayed across



* * *



the compartment in the overcoat, which, worn without a jacket, hung on him like a priestly vestment; he drew the curtains across the door, pulling them until the metallic buttons reached the leather buttonholes. With a gesture toward his companion, he asked permission to turn off the light; the salesman was sleeping. He turned the light off; in the bluish penumbra of the little safety light, he moved just enough to close the curtains at the window, or, rather, to draw them almost closed: here he always left a crack open: in the morning he liked to have a day of sunshine in his bedroom. One more operation: wind his watch. There, now he could go to bed. With one bound, he had flung himself horizontally on the seat, on his side, the overcoat smooth, his legs bent, hands in his pockets, token in his hand, his feet—still in his slippers—on the newspaper, nose against the pillow, beret over his eyes. Now, with a deliberate relaxation of all his feverish inner activity, a vague anticipation of tomorrow, he would fall asleep.

The conductor's curt intrusion (he opened the door with a yank, with confident hand unbuttoned both curtains in a single movement as he raised his other hand to turn on the light) was foreseen. Federico, however, preferred not to wait for it: if the man arrived before he had fallen asleep, fine; if his first sleep had already begun, a habitual and anonymous appearance like the conductor's interrupted it only for a few seconds, just as a sleeper in the country wakes at the cry of a nocturnal bird but then rolls over as if he hadn't waked at all. Federico had the ticket ready in his pocket and held it out, not getting up, almost not opening his eyes, his hand remaining open until he felt the ticket again between his fingers; he pocketed it and would immediately have fallen



* * *



back to sleep if he hadn't been obliged to perform an operation that nullified all his earlier effort at immobility: namely, to get up and fasten the curtains again. On this trip he was still awake, and the ticket check lasted a bit longer than usual, because the salesman, caught in his sleep, took a while to get his bearings and find his ticket. He doesn't have prompt reflexes like mine, Federico thought, and took the opportunity to overwhelm him with new variations of his imaginary song. "Je voyage l'amour ..." he crooned. The idea of using the verb voyager transitively gave him the sense of fullness that poetic inspiration, even the slightest, gives, and the satisfaction of having finally found an expression adequate to his spiritual state. "Je voyage amour! Je voyage liberté! Jour et nuit je cours ... far les chemins-de-fer. ..."

The compartment was again in darkness. The train devoured its invisible road. Could Federico ask more of life? From such bliss to sleep, the transition is brief. Federico dozed off as if sinking into a pit of feathers. Five or six minutes only: then he woke. He was hot, all in a sweat. The coaches were already heated, since it was well into autumn, but he, recalling the cold he had felt on his previous trip, had thought to lie down in his overcoat. He rose, took it off, flung it over himself like a blanket, leaving his shoulders and chest free but still trying to spread it out so as not to make ugly wrinkles. He turned onto his other side. The sweat had spread over his body a network of itching. He unbuttoned his shirt, scratched his chest, scratched one leg. The constricted condition of his body that he now felt evoked thoughts of physical freedom, the sea, nakedness, swimming, running, and all this culminated in the embracing of Cinzia, the sum of the good of existence. And there, half asleep, he could no longer dis-



* * *



tinguish present discomforts from the yearned-for good; he had everything at once; he writhed in an uneasiness that presupposed and almost contained every possible well-being. He fell asleep again.

The loudspeakers of the stations that woke him every so often are not as disagreeable as many people suppose. Waking and knowing at once where you are offers two different possibilities of satisfaction : you can think, if the station is farther along than you imagined: How much I've slept! How far I've gone without realizing it! Or, if the station is way behind : Good, now I have plenty of time to fall asleep again and continue sleeping without any concern.

Now he was in the second of these situations. The salesman was there, now also stretched out asleep, softly snoring. Federico was still warm. He rose, half-sleeping, groped for the regulator of the electric heating system, found it on the wall opposite his, just above the head of his traveling companion, extended his hands, balancing on one foot because one of his slippers had come off, and angrily turned the dial to "Low." The salesman had to open his eyes at that moment and see that clawing hand over his head : he gulped, swallowed saliva, then sank back into his haze. Federico flung himself down. The electric regulator let out a hum, a red light came on, as if it were trying to explain, to start a dialogue. Federico impatiently waited for the heat to be dispelled; he rose to lower the window a crack, but since the train was now moving very fast, he felt cold and closed it again. He shifted the regulator toward "Automatic." His face on the amorous pillow, he lay for a while listening to the buzzes of the regulator like mysterious messages from ultraterrestrial worlds. The train was traveling over the earth, surmounted by endless spaces, and



* * *



in all the universe he and he alone was the man who was speeding toward Cinzia U.

The next awakening was at the cry of a coffee vendor in the Stazione Principe, Genoa. The salesman had vanished. Carefully, Federico stopped up the gaps in the wall of curtains, and listened with apprehension to every footstep approaching along the passage, to every opening of a door. No, nobody came in. But at Genoa-Brignole, a hand opened a breach, groped, tried to part the curtains, failed; a human form appeared, crouching, and cried in dialect toward the corridor, "Come on! It's empty here!" A heavy shuffling of boots replied, with scattered voices, and four Alpine soldiers entered the darkness of the compartment and almost sat down on top of Federico. As they bent over him, as if over an unknown animal—"Oh! Who's this here?"—he pulled himself up abruptly on his arms and confronted them: "Aren't there any other compartments?" "No. All full," they answered, "but never mind. We'll all sit over on this side. Stay comfortable." They seemed intimidated, but actually they were simply accustomed to curt manners and paid no attention to anything; brawling, they flung themselves on the other seat. "Are you going far?" Federico asked, meeker now, from his pillow. No, they were getting off at one of the first stations. "And where are you going?" "To Rome." "Madonna! All the way to Rome!" Their tone of amazed compassion was transformed, in Federico's heart, into a heroic, melting pride.

And so the journey continued. "Could you turn off the light?" They turned it off, and remained faceless in the dark, noisy, cumbersome, shoulder to shoulder. One raised a curtain at the window and peered out: it was a moonlit night. Lying down, Federico saw only the sky and now and then the row



* * *



of lights of a little station that dazzled his eyes and cast a rake of shadows on the ceiling. These alpini were rough country boys, going home on leave; they never stopped talking loud and hailing one another, and at times in the darkness they punched and slapped one another, except one of them who was sleeping and another who coughed. They spoke a murky dialect. Federico could grasp words now and then— talk about the barracks, the brothel. For some reason, he felt he didn't hate them. Now he was with them, almost one of them, and he identified with them for the pleasure of then imagining himself tomorrow at the side of Cinzia U., feeling the dizzying, sudden shift of fate. But this was not to belittle them, as with the stranger earlier; now he remained obscurely on their side; their unaware blessing accompanied him toward Cinzia; in everything that was most remote from her lay the value of having her, the sense of his being the one who had her.

Now Federico's arm was numb. He lifted it, shook it; the numbness wouldn't go away, turned into pain; the pain turned into slow well-being as he flapped his bent arm in the air. The alpini, all four of them, sat there staring at him, mouths agape. "What's come over him? ... He's dreaming. ... Hey, what are you doing? ..." Then, with youthful fickleness, they went back to teasing one another. Federico now tried to revive the circulation in one leg, putting his foot on the floor and stamping hard.

Between dozing and clowning, an hour went by. And he didn't feel he was their enemy; perhaps he was no one's enemy; perhaps he had become a good man. He didn't hate them even when, a little before their station, they went out, leaving the door and the curtains wide open. He got up, bar-



* * *



ricaded himself again, savored once more the pleasure of solitude, but with no bitterness toward anyone.

Now his legs were cold. He pushed the cuffs of his trousers inside his socks, but he was still cold. He wrapped the folds of his overcoat around his legs. Now his stomach and shoulders were cold. He turned the regulator up almost to "High," tucked himself in again, pretended not to notice that the overcoat was getting ugly creases though he felt them under him. Now he was ready to renounce everything for his immediate comfort; the awareness of being good to his neighbor drove him to be good to himself and, in this general indulgence, to find once more the road to sleep.

From now on the awakenings were intermittent and mechanical. The entrances of the conductor, with his practiced movement in opening the curtains, were easily distinguishable from the uncertain attempts of the night travelers who had got on at an intermediate station and were bewildered at finding a series of compartments with the curtains drawn. Equally professional but more brusque and grim was the appearance of the policeman, who abruptly turned on the light in the sleeper's face, examined him, turned it off, and went out in silence, leaving behind him a prison chill.

Then a man came in, at some station buried in the night. Federico became aware of him when he was already huddled in one corner, and from the damp odor of his coat realized that outside it was raining. When he woke again the man had vanished, at God knows what other invisible station, and for Federico he had been only a shadow smelling of rain, with heavy respiration.

He was cold; he turned the regulator all the way to "High," then stuck his hand under the seat to feel the warmth rise.



* * *



He felt nothing; he groped there; everything must have been cut. off. He put his overcoat on again, then removed it; he hunted for his good sweater, took off the old one, put on the good one, put the old one on over it, put the overcoat on again, huddled down, and tried to achieve once more the sensation of fullness that earlier had led him to sleep; but he couldn't manage to recall anything, and when he remembered the song he was already sleeping, and that rhythm continued cradling him triumphantly in his sleep.

The first morning light came through the cracks like the cries of "Hot coffee!" and "Newspapers!" at a station perhaps still in Tuscany, or at the very beginning of Latium. It wasn't raining; beyond the damp windows the sky already displayed a southern indifference to autumn. The desire for something hot, and also the automatic reaction of the city man who begins all his mornings by glancing at the newspapers, acted on Federico's reflexes; and he felt that he should rush to the window and buy coffee or the paper or both. But he succeeded so well in convincing himself that he was still asleep and hadn't heard anything that this persuasion still held when the compartment was invaded by the usual people from Civitavecchia who take the early-morning trains into Rome. And the best part of his sleep, that of the first hours of daylight, had almost no breaks.

When he really did wake up, he was dazzled by the light that came in through the panes, now without curtains. On the seat opposite him a row of people were lined up, including even a little boy on a fat woman's lap, and a man was seated on Federico's own seat, in the space left free by his bent legs. The men had various faces but all had something vaguely bureaucratic about them, with the one possible vari-



* * *



ant of an air-force officer in a uniform laden with ribbons; it was also obvious that the women were going to call on relatives who worked in some government office. In any case, these were people going to Rome to deal with red tape for themselves or for others. And all of them, some looking up from the conservative newspaper Il Tempo, observed Federico stretched out there at the level of their knees, shapeless, bundled into that overcoat, without feet, like a seal; as he was detaching himself from the saliva-stained pillow, disheveled, the beret on the back of his head, one cheek marked by the wrinkles in the pillowcase; as he got up, stretched with awkward, seal-like movements, gradually rediscovering the use of his legs, slipping the slippers on the wrong feet, and now unbuttoning and scratching himself between the double sweaters and the rumpled shirt, while running his still-sticky eyes over them and smiling.

At the window, the broad Roman campagna spread out. Federico sat there for a moment, his hands on his knees, still smiling; then, with a gesture, he asked permission to take the newspaper from the knees of the man facing him. He glanced at the headlines, felt as always the sense of finding himself in a remote country, looked olympically at the arches of the aqueducts that sped past outside the window, returned the newspaper, and got up to look for his toilet kit in his suitcase.

At the Stazione Termini the first to jump down from the car, fresh as a daisy, was Federico. He was clasping the token in his hand. In the niches between the columns and the newsstands, the gray telephones were waiting only for him. He put the token in the slot, dialed the number, listened with beating heart to the distant ring, heard Cinzia's "Hello .. ." still



* * *



suffused with sleep and soft warmth, and he was already in the tension of their days together, in the desperate battle against the hours; and he realized he would never manage to tell her anything of the significance of that night, which he now sensed was fading, like every perfect night of love, at the cruel explosion of day.



* * *



THE ADVENTURE OF A READER

The coast road ran high above the cape; the sea was below, a sheer drop, and on all sides, as far as the hazy mountainous horizon. The sun was on all sides, too, as if the sky and the sea were two glasses magnifying it. Down below, against the jagged, irregular rocks of the cape, the calm water slapped without making foam. Amedeo Oliva climbed down a steep flight of steps, shouldering his bicycle, which he then left in a shady place, after closing the padlock. He continued down the steps amid spills of dry yellow earth and agaves jutting into the void, and he was already looking around for the most comfortable stretch of rock to lie down. Under his arm he had a rolled-up towel and, inside the towel, his bathing trunks and a book.

The cape was a solitary place : only a few groups of bathers dived into the water or took the sun, hidden from one another by the irregular conformation of the place. Between two boulders that shielded him from view, Amedeo undressed, put on his trunks, and began jumping from the top of one rock to the next. Leaping in this way on his skinny legs, he crossed half the rocky shore, sometimes almost grazing the faces of



* * *



half-hidden pairs of bathers stretched out on beach towels. Having gone past an outcrop of sandy rock, its surface porous and irregular, he came upon smooth stones, with rounded corners; Amedeo took off his sandals, held them in his hand, and continued running barefoot, with the confidence of someone who can judge distances between rocks and whose soles nothing can hurt. He reached a spot directly above the sea; there was a kind of shelf running around the cliff at the halfway point. There Amedeo stopped. On a flat ledge he arranged his clothes, carefully folded, and set the sandals on them, soles up, so no gust of wind would carry everything off (in reality, only the faintest breath of air was stirring, from the sea; but this precaution was obviously a habit with him). A little bag he was carrying turned into a rubber cushion; he blew into it until it had filled out, then set it down; and below it, at a point slightly sloping from that rocky ledge, he spread out his towel. He flung himself on it supine, and already his hands were opening his book at the marked page. So he lay stretched out on the ledge, in that sun glaring on all sides, his skin dry (his tan was opaque, irregular, as of one who takes the sun without any method but doesn't burn); on the rubber cushion he set his head sheathed in a white canvas cap, moistened (yes, he had also climbed down to a low rock, to dip his cap in the water), immobile except for his eyes (invisible behind his dark glasses), which followed along the black and white lines the horse of Fabrizio del Dongo. Below him opened a little cove of greenish-blue water, transparent almost to the bottom. The rocks, according to their exposure, were bleached white or covered with algae. A little pebble beach was at their foot. Every now and then Amedeo raised his eyes to that broad view, lingered on a glinting of



* * *



the surface, on the oblique dash of a crab; then he went back, gripped, to the page where Raskolnikov counted the steps that separated him from the old woman's door, or where Lucien de Rubempré, before sticking his head into the noose, gazed at the towers and roofs of the Conciergerie.

For some time Amedeo had tended to reduce his participation in active life to the minimum. Not that he didn't like action: on the contrary, love of action nourished his whole character, all his tastes; and yet, from one year to the next, the yearning to be someone who did things declined, declined, until he wondered if he had ever really harbored that yearning. His interest in action survived, however, in his pleasure in reading; his passion was always the narration of events, the stories, the tangle of human situations—nineteenth-century novels especially, but also memoirs and biographies, and so on down to thrillers and science fiction, which he didn't disdain but which gave him less satisfaction because they were short. Amedeo loved thick tomes, and in tackling them he felt the physical pleasure of undertaking a great task. Weighing them in his hand, thick, closely printed, squat, he would consider with some apprehension the number of pages, the length of the chapters, then venture into them, a bit reluctant at the beginning, without any desire to perform the initial chore of remembering the names, catching the drift of the story; then he would entrust himself to it, running along the lines, crossing the grid of the uniform page, and beyond the leaden print the flame and fire of battle appeared, the cannonball that, whistling through the sky, fell at the feet of Prince Andrei, and the shop filled with engravings and statues where Frederic Moreau, his heart in his mouth, was to meet the Arnoux family. Beyond the surface of the page you entered a world where



* * *



life was more alive than here on this side: like the surface of the water that separates us from that blue-and-green world, rifts as far as the eye can see, expanses of fine, ribbed sand, creatures half animal and half vegetable.

The sun beat down hard, the rock was burning, and after a while Amedeo felt he was one with the rock. He reached the end of the chapter, closed the book, inserted an advertising coupon to mark his place, took off his canvas cap and his glasses, stood up half dazed, and with broad leaps went down to the far end of the rock, where a group of kids were constantly, at all hours, diving in and climbing out. Amedeo stood erect on a shelf over the sea, not too high, a couple of yards above the water; his eyes, still dazzled, contemplated the luminous transparence below him, and all of a sudden he plunged. His dive was always the same: headlong, fairly correct, but with a certain stiffness. The passage from the sunny air to the tepid water would have been almost unnoticeable if it hadn't been abrupt. He didn't surface immediately: he liked to swim underwater, down, down, his belly almost scraping bottom, as long as his breath held out. He very much enjoyed physical effort, setting himself difficult assignments (for this he came to read his book at the cape, making the climb on his bicycle, pedaling up furiously under the noonday sun). Every time, swimming underwater, he tried to reach a wall of rocks that rose at a certain point from the sandy bed and was covered by a thick patch of sea grasses. He surfaced among those rocks and swam around a bit; he began to do "the Australian crawl" methodically, but expending more energy than necessary; soon, tired of swimming with his face in the water, as if blind, he took to a freer side stroke; sight gave him more satisfaction than movement, and in a little



* * *



while he gave up the side stroke to drift on his back, moving less and less regularly and steadily, until he stopped altogether, in a dead-man's-float. And so he turned and twisted in that sea as in a bed without sides; he would set himself the goal of a sandbar to be reached, or limit the number of strokes, and he couldn't rest until he had carried out that task. For a while he would dawdle lazily, then he would head out to sea, taken by the desire to have nothing around him but sky and water; for a while he would move close to the rocks scattered along the cape, not to overlook any of the possible itineraries of that little archipelago. But as he swam, he realized that the curiosity occupying more and more of his mind was to know the outcome—for example—of the story of Albertine. Would Marcel find her again, or not? He swam furiously or floated idly, but his heart was between the pages of the book left behind on shore. And so, with rapid strokes, he would regain his rock, seek the place for climbing up, and, almost without realizing it, he would be up there again, rubbing the Turkish towel on his back. Sticking the canvas cap on his head once more, he would lie in the sun again, to begin the next chapter.

He was not, however, a hasty, voracious reader. He had reached the age when rereading a book—for the second, third, or fourth time—affords more pleasure than a first reading. And yet he still had many continents to discover. Every summer, the most laborious packing before his departure for the sea involved the heavy suitcase to be filled with books. Following the whims and dictates of the months of city life, each year Amedeo would choose certain famous books to reread and certain authors to essay for the first time. And there, on the rock, he went through them, lingering over sentences, often raising his eyes from the page to ponder, to collect his thoughts.



* * *



At a certain point, raising his eyes in this way, he saw that on the little pebble beach below, in the cove, a woman had appeared and was lying there.

She was deeply tanned, thin, not very young or particularly beautiful, but nakedness became her (she wore a very tiny "two-piece," rolled up at the edges to get as much sun as she could), and Amedeo's eye was drawn to her. He realized that as he read he was raising his eyes more and more often from the book to gaze into the air; and this air was the air that lay between that woman and himself. Her face (she was stretched out on the sloping shore, on a rubber mattress, and at every flicker of his pupils Amedeo saw her legs, not shapely but harmonious, the excellently smooth belly, the bosom slim in a perhaps not unpleasant way but probably sagging a bit, the shoulders a bit too bony, and then the neck and the arms, and the face masked by the sunglasses and by the brim of the straw hat) was slightly lined, lively, aware, and ironic. Amedeo classified the type: the independent woman, on holiday by herself, who dislikes crowded beaches and prefers the more deserted rocks, and likes to lie there and become black as coal; he evaluated the amount of lazy sensuality and of chronic frustration there was in her; he thought fleetingly of the likelihood of a rapidly consummated fling, measured it against the prospect of a trite conversation, a program for the evening, probable logistic difficulties, the effort of concentration always required to become acquainted, even superficially, with a person; and he went on reading, convinced that this woman couldn't interest him at all.

But he had been lying on that stretch of rock for too long, or else those fleeting thoughts had left a wake of restlessness in him; anyway, he felt an ache, the harshness of the rock



* * *



under the towel that was his only pallet began to chafe him. He got up to look for another spot where he could stretch out. For a moment, he hesitated between two places that seemed equally comfortable to him: one more distant from the little beach where the tanned lady was lying (actually behind an outcrop of rock that blocked the sight of her), the other closer. The thought of approaching, and of then perhaps being led by some unforeseeable circumstance to start a conversation, and thus perforce to interrupt his reading, made him immediately prefer the farther spot; but when he thought it over, it really would look as if, the moment that lady had arrived, he wanted to run off, and this might seem a bit rude; so he picked the closer spot, since his reading absorbed him so much anyway that the view of the lady—not specially beautiful, for that matter—could hardly distract him. He lay on one side, holding the book so that it blocked the sight of her, but it was awkward to keep his arm at that height, and in the end he lowered it. Now, every time he had to start a new line, the same gaze that ran along the lines encountered, just beyond the edge of the page, the legs of the solitary vacationer. She, too, had shifted slightly, looking for a more comfortable position, and the fact that she had raised her knees and crossed her legs precisely in Amedeo's direction allowed him to observe better her proportions, not at all unattractive. In short, Amedeo (though a shaft of rock was sawing at his hip) couldn't have found a finer position: the pleasure he could derive from the sight of the tanned lady—a marginal pleasure, something extra, but not for that reason to be discarded, since it could be enjoyed with no effort—did not mar the pleasure of reading, but was inserted into its normal process, so that now he was sure he could go on reading without being tempted to look away.



* * *



Everything was calm; only the course of his reading flowed on, with the motionless landscape serving as frame; the tanned lady had become a necessary part of this landscape. Amedeo was naturally relying on his own ability to remain absolutely still for a long time, but he hadn't taken into account the woman's restlessness: now she rose, was standing, making her way among the stones toward the water. She had moved— Amedeo understood immediately—to get a closer look at a great medusa that a group of boys were bringing ashore, poking at it with lengths of reed. The tanned lady bent toward the overturned body of the medusa and was questioning the boys; her legs rose from wooden clogs with very high heels, unsuited to those rocks; her body, seen from behind as Amedeo now saw it, was that of a more attractive younger woman than she had first seemed to him. He thought that, for a man seeking a romance, that dialogue between her and the fisher-boys would have been a "classic" opening: approach, also remark on the capture of the medusa, and in that way engage her in conversation. The very thing he wouldn't have done for all the gold in the world! he added to himself, plunging again into his reading.

To be sure, this rule of conduct of his also prevented him from satisfying a natural curiosity concerning the medusa, which seemed, as he saw it there, of unusual dimensions, and also of a strange hue between pink and violet. This curiosity about marine animals was in no way a sidetrack, either; it was coherent with the nature of his passion for reading. At that moment, in any case, his concentration on the page he was reading—a long descriptive passage—had been relaxing; in short, it was absurd that to protect himself against the danger of starting a conversation with that woman he should also deny himself spontaneous and quite legitimate impulses



* * *



such as that of amusing himself for a few minutes by taking a close look at a medusa. He shut his book at the marked page and stood up. His decision couldn't have been more timely: at that same moment the lady moved away from the little group of boys, preparing to return to her mattress. Amedeo realized this as he was approaching and felt the need of immediately saying something in a loud voice. He shouted to the kids, "Watch out! It could be dangerous!"

The boys, crouched around the animal, didn't even look up: they continued, with the lengths of reed they held in their hands, to try to raise it and turn it over; but the lady turned abruptly and went back to the shore, with a half-questioning, half-fearful air. "Oh, how frightening! Does it bite?"

"If you touch it, it stings," he explained and realized he was heading not toward the medusa but toward the lady, who, for some reason, covered her bosom with her arms in a useless shudder and cast almost furtive glances, first at the supine animal, then at Amedeo. He reassured her, and so, predictably, they started conversing; but it didn't matter, because Amedeo would soon be going back to the book awaiting him: he only wanted to take a glance at the medusa. He led the tanned lady over, to lean into the center of the circle of boys. The lady was now observing with revulsion, her knuckles against her teeth, and at a certain point, as she and he were side by side, their arms came into contact and they delayed a moment before separating them. Amedeo then started talking about medusas. His direct experience wasn't great, but he had read some books by famous fishermen and underwater explorers, so—skipping the smaller fauna—he began promptly talking about the famous manta-. The lady listened to him,



* * *



displaying great interest and interjecting something from time to time, always irrelevantly, the way women will. "You see this red spot on my arm? That wasn't a medusa, was it?" Amedeo touched the spot, just above the elbow, and said no. It was a bit red because she had been leaning on it while lying down.

With that, it was all over. They said good-bye; she went back to her place, and he to his, where he resumed reading. It had been an interval lasting the right amount of time, neither more nor less, a human encounter, not unpleasant (the lady was polite, discreet, unassuming) precisely because it was barely adumbrated. In the book he now found a far fuller and more concrete attachment to reality, where everything had a meaning, an importance, a rhythm. Amedeo felt himself in a perfect situation: the printed page opened true life to him, profound and exciting, and, raising his eyes, he found a pleasant but casual juxtaposition of colors and sensations, an accessory and decorative world that couldn't commit him to anything. The tanned lady, from her mattress, gave him a smile and a wave; he replied also with a smile and a vague gesture, and immediately lowered his eyes. But the lady had said something.

"Eh?"

"You're reading. Do you read all the time?"

"Mmm..."

"Interesting?"

"Yes."

"Enjoy yourself!"

"Thank you."

He mustn't raise his eyes again. At least not until the end of the chapter. He read it in a flash. The lady now had a



* * *



cigarette in her mouth and motioned to him, as she pointed to it. Amedeo had the impression that for some time she had been trying to attract his attention. "I beg your pardon?"

"... match. Forgive me. ..."

"Oh, I'm very sorry. I don't smoke. ..."

The chapter was finished. Amedeo rapidly read the first lines of the next one, which he found surprisingly attractive, but to begin the next chapter without anxiety he had to resolve as quickly as possible the matter of the match. "Wait!" He stood up, began leaping among the rocks, half dazed by the sun, until he found a little group of people smoking. He borrowed a box of matches, ran to the lady, lighted her cigarette, ran back to return the matches; and they said to him, "Keep them, you can keep them." He ran again to the lady to leave the matches with her, and she thanked him; he waited a moment before leaving her, but realized that after this delay he had to say something, and so he said, "You aren't swim-mmg?

"In a little while," the lady said. "What about you?"

"I've already had my swim."

"And you're not going to take another dip?"

"Yes, I'll read one more chapter, then have a swim again."

"Me, too, when I finish my cigarette, I'll dive in."

"See you later then."

"Later..."

This kind of appointment restored to Amedeo a calm such as he—now he realized—had not known since the moment he became aware of the solitary lady: now his conscience was no longer oppressed by the thought of having to have any sort of relationship with that lady; everything was postponed to the moment of their swim—a swim he would have taken



* * *



anyway, even if the lady hadn't been there—and for now he could abandon himself without remorse to the pleasure of reading. So thoroughly that he didn't notice when, at a certain point—before he had reached the end of the chapter—the lady finished her cigarette, stood up, and approached him to invite him to go swimming. He saw the clogs and the straight legs just beyond the book; his eyes moved up; he lowered them again to the page—the sun was dazzling—and read a few lines in haste, looked up again, and heard her say, "Isn't your head about to explode? I'm going to have a dip!" It was nice to stay there, to go on reading and look up every now and then. But since he could no longer put it off, Amedeo did something he never did : he skipped almost half a page, to the conclusion of the chapter, which he read, on the other hand, with great attention, and then he stood up. "Let's go. Shall we dive from the point there?"

After all the talk of diving, the lady cautiously slipped into the water from a ledge on a level with it. Amedeo plunged headlong from a higher rock than usual. It was the hour of the still slow inclining of the sun. The sea was golden. They swam in that gold, somewhat separated: Amedeo at times sank for a few strokes underwater and amused himself by frightening the lady, swimming beneath her. Amused himself, after a fashion: it was kid stuff, of course, but for that matter, what else was there to do, anyway? Swimming with another person was slightly more tiresome than swimming alone, but the difference was minimal. Beyond the gold glints, the water's blue deepened, as if from down below rose an inky darkness. It was useless: nothing equaled the savor of life found in books. Skimming over some bearded rocks in mid-water and leading her, frightened (to help her onto a sandbar, he also



* * *



clasped her hips and bosom, but his hands, from the immersion, had become almost insensitive, with white, wrinkled pads), Amedeo turned his gaze more and more often toward land, where the colored jacket of his book stood out. There was no other story, no other possible expectation beyond what he had left suspended, between the pages where his bookmark was; all the rest was an empty interval.

However, returning to shore, giving her a hand, drying himself, then each rubbing the other's back, finally created a kind of intimacy, so that Amedeo felt it would have been impolite to go off on his own once more. "Well," he said, "I'll stretch out and read here; I'll go get my book and pillow." And read: he had taken care to warn her. She said, "Yes, fine. I'll smoke a cigarette and read Annabella a bit myself." She had one of those women's magazines with her, and so both of them could lie and read, each on his own. Her voice struck him like a drop of cold water on the nape of the neck, but she was only saying, "Why do you want to lie there on that hard rock? Come onto the mattress: I'll make room for you." The invitation was polite, the mattress was comfortable, and Amedeo gladly accepted. They lay there, he facing in one direction and she in the other. She didn't say another word, she leafed through those illustrated pages, and Amedeo managed to sink completely into his reading. It was a lingering sunset, when the heat and light hardly decline but remain only barely, sweetly attenuated. The novel Amedeo was reading had reached the point where the darkest secrets of characters and plot are revealed, and you move in a familiar world, and you achieve a kind of parity, an ease between author and reader: you proceed together, and you would like to go on forever.



* * *



On the rubber mattress it was possible to make those slight movements necessary to keep the limbs from going to sleep, and one of his legs, in one direction, came to graze a leg of hers, in the other. He didn't mind this, and kept his leg there; and obviously she didn't mind, either, because she also refrained from moving. The sweetness of the contact mingled with the reading and, as far as Amedeo was concerned, made it the more complete; but for the lady it must have been different, because she rose, sat up, and said, "Really ..."

Amedeo was forced to raise his head from the book. The woman was looking at him, and her eyes were bitter.

"Something wrong?" he asked.

"Don't you ever get tired of reading?" she asked. "You could hardly be called good company! Don't you know that, with women, you're supposed to make conversation?" she added; her half smile was perhaps meant only to be ironic, though to Amedeo, who at that moment would have paid anything rather than give up his novel, it seemed downright threatening. What have I got myself into, moving down here? he thought. Now it was clear that with this woman beside him he wouldn't read a line.

I must make her realize she's made a mistake, he thought, that I'm not at all the type for a beach courtship, that I'm the sort it's best not to pay too much attention to. "Conversation," he said, aloud, "what kind of conversation?" and he extended his hand toward her. There, now: if I lay a hand on her, she will surely be insulted by such an unsuitable action, maybe she'll give me a slap and go away. But whether it was his own natural reserve, or there was a different, sweeter yearning that in reality he was pursuing, the caress, instead of being brutal and provocatory, was shy,



* * *



melancholy, almost entreating: he grazed her throat with his fingers, lifted a little necklace she was wearing, and let it fall. The woman's reply consisted of a movement, first slow, as if resigned and a bit ironic—she lowered her chin to one side, to trap his hand—then rapid, as if in a calculated, aggressive spring: she bit the back of his hand. "Ow!" Amedeo cried. They moved apart.

"Is this how you make conversation?" the lady said.

There, Amedeo quickly reasoned, my way of making conversation doesn't suit her, so there won't be any conversing, and now I can read; he had already started a new paragraph. But he was trying to deceive himself: he understood clearly that by now they had gone too far, that between him and the tanned lady a tension had been created that could no longer be interrupted; he also understood that he was the first to wish not to interrupt it, since in any case he wouldn't be able to return to the single tension of his reading, all intimate and interior. He could, on the contrary, try to make this exterior tension follow, so to speak, a course parallel to the other, so that he would not be obliged to renounce either the lady or the book.

Since she had sat up, with her back propped against a rock, he sat beside her, put his arm around her shoulders, keeping his book on his knees. He turned toward her and kissed her. They moved apart, then kissed again. Then he lowered his head toward the book and resumed reading.

As long as he could, he wanted to continue reading. His fear was that he wouldn't be able to finish the novel: the beginning of a summer affair could be considered the end of his calm hours of solitude, for a completely different rhythm would dominate his days of vacation; and obviously, when



* * *



you are completely lost in reading a book, if you have to interrupt it, then pick it up again some time later, most of the pleasure is lost: you forget so many details, you never manage to become immersed in it as before.

The sun was gradually setting behind the next promontory, and then the next, and the one after that, leaving remnants of color against the light. From the little coves of the cape, all the bathers had gone. Now the two of them were alone. Amedeo had his arm around the woman's shoulders, he was reading, he gave her kisses on the neck and on the ears—which it seemed to him she liked—and every now and then, when she turned, on the mouth; then he resumed reading. Perhaps this time he had found the ideal equilibrium : he could go on like this for a hundred pages or so. But once again it was she who wanted to change the situation. She began to stiffen, almost to reject him, and then said, "It's late. Let's go. I'm going to dress."

This abrupt decision opened up quite different prospects. Amedeo was a bit disoriented, but he didn't stop to weigh the pros and cons. He had reached a climax in the book, and her dimly heard words, "I'm going to dress," had, in his mind, immediately been translated into these others: While she dresses, I'll have time to read a few pages without being disturbed.

But she said, "Hold up the towel, please," addressing him as tu for perhaps the first time. "I don't want anyone to see me." The precaution was useless because the shore by now was deserted, but Amedeo consented amiably, since he could hold up the towel while remaining seated and so continue to read the book on his knees.

On the other side of the towel, the lady had undone her



* * *



halter, paying no attention to whether he was looking at her or not. Amedeo didn't know whether to look at her, pretending to read, or to read, pretending to look at her. He was interested in the one thing and the other, but looking at her seemed too indiscreet, while going on reading seemed too indifferent. The lady did not follow the usual method used by bathers who dress outdoors, first putting on clothes and then removing the bathing suit underneath them. No: now that her bosom was bared, she also took off the bottom of her suit. This was when, for the first time, she turned her face toward him; and it was a sad face, with a bitter curl to the mouth, and she shook her head, shook her head and looked at him.

Since it has to happen, it might as well happen immediately, Amedeo thought, diving forward, book in hand, one finger between the pages; but what he read in that gaze—reproach, commiseration, dejection, as if to say: Stupid, all right, we'll do it if it has to be done like this, but you don't understand a thing, any more than the others—or, rather, what he did not read, since he didn't know how to read gazes, but only vaguely sensed, roused in him a moment of such transport toward the woman that, embracing her and falling onto the mattress with her, he only slightly turned his head toward the book to make sure it didn't fall into the sea.

It had fallen, instead, right beside the mattress, open, but a few pages had flipped over; and Amedeo, even in the ecstasy of his embraces, tried to free one hand to put the bookmark at the right page. Nothing is more irritating when you're eager to resume reading than to have to search through the book, unable to find your place.

Their lovemaking was a perfect match. It could perhaps have been extended a bit longer: but, then, hadn't everything been lightning-fast in their encounter?



* * *



Dusk was falling. Below, the rocks opened out, sloping, into a little harbor. Now she had gone down there and was halfway into the water. "Come down; we'll have a last swim. ..." Amedeo, biting his lip, was counting how many pages were left till the end.



* * *



THE ADVENTURE OF A NEARSIGHTED MAN

Amilcare Carruga was still young, not lacking resources, without exaggerated material or spiritual ambitions: nothing, therefore, prevented him from enjoying life. And yet he came to realize that for a while now this life, for him, had imperceptibly been losing its savor. Trifles, like, for example, looking at women in the street: there had been a time when he would cast his eyes on them greedily; now perhaps he would instinctively start to look at them, but it would immediately seem to him that they were speeding past like a wind, stirring no sensation, so he would lower his eyelids, indifferent. Once new cities had excited him—he traveled often, since he was a merchant—but now he felt only irritation, confusion, loss of bearings. Before, since he lived alone, he used to go to the movies every evening; he enjoyed himself, no matter what the picture was. Anyone who goes all the time sees, as it were, one huge film, in endless installments: he knows all the actors, even the character players and the walk-ons, and this recognition of them every time is amusing in itself. Well : now even at the movies, all those faces seemed to have become colorless to him, flat, anonymous; he was bored.



* * *



He caught on, finally. The fact was that he was nearsighted. The oculist prescribed eyeglasses for him. After that moment his life changed, became a hundred times richer in interest than before.

Just slipping on the glasses was, every time, a thrill for him. He might be, for instance, at a tram stop, and he would be overcome by sadness because everything, people and objects around him, was so vague, banal, worn from being as it was; and him there, groping in the midst of a flabby world of nearly decayed forms and colors. He would put on his glasses to read the number of the arriving tram, and all would change : the most ordinary things, even lampposts, were etched with countless tiny details, with sharp lines, and the faces, the faces of strangers, each filled up with little marks, dots of beard, pimples, nuances of expression that there had been no hint of before; and he could understand what material clothes were made of, could guess the weave, could spot the fraying at the hem. Looking became an amusement, a spectacle; not looking at this thing or that—just looking. And so Amilcare Carruga forgot to note the tram number, missed one car after another or else climbed onto the wrong one. He saw such a quantity of things that it was as if he no longer saw anything. Little by little, he had to become accustomed, learn all over again from the beginning what was pointless to look at and what was necessary.

The women he encountered in the street, who before had been reduced for him to impalpable, blurred shadows, he could now see in all the precise interplay of voids and solids that their bodies make as they move inside their dresses, and could judge the freshness of the skin and the warmth contained in their gaze, and it seemed to him he was not



* * *



only seeing them but already actually possessing them. He might be walking along without his glasses (he didn't wear them all the time, to avoid tiring his eyes unnecessarily; only if he had to look into the distance) and there, ahead of him on the sidewalk, a bright-colored dress would be outlined. With a now automatic movement, Amilcare would promptly take his glasses from his pocket and slip them onto his nose. This indiscriminate covetousness of sensations was often punished: maybe the woman proved a hag. Amilcare Carruga became more cautious. And at times an approaching woman might seem to him, from her colors, her walk, too humble, insignificant, not worth taking into consideration, and he wouldn't put on his glasses; but then, when they passed each other close, he realized that, on the contrary, there was something about her that attracted him strongly, God knows what, and at that moment he seemed to catch a look of hers, as if of expectation, perhaps a look that she had trained on him at his first appearance and he hadn't been aware of it. But by now it was too late: she had vanished at the intersection, climbed into the bus, was far away beyond the traffic light, and he wouldn't be able to recognize her another time. And so, through his need for eyeglasses, he was slowly learning how to live.

But the newest world his glasses opened up to him was that of the night. The night city, formerly shrouded in shapeless clouds of darkness and colored glows, now revealed precise divisions, prominences, perspectives; the lights had specific borders, the neon signs once immersed in a vague halo now could be read letter by letter. The beautiful thing about night was, however, that the margin of haziness his lenses dispelled in daylight, here remained: Amilcare Carruga would feel



* * *



impelled to put his glasses on, then realized he was already wearing them. The sense of fullness never equaled the drive of insatisfaction; darkness was a bottomless humus in which he never tired of digging. In the streets, above the houses spotted with yellow windows, square at last, he raised his eyes toward the starry sky: and he discovered that the stars were not splattered against the ground of the sky like broken eggs, but were very sharp jabs of light that opened up infinite distances around themselves.

This new concern with the reality of the external world was connected with his worries about what he himself was, also inspired by the use of eyeglasses. Amilcare Carruga didn't attach much importance to himself; however, as sometimes happens with the most unassuming of people, he was greatly attached to his way of being. Now, to pass from the category of men without glasses to that of men with glasses seems nothing, but it is a very big leap. For example: when someone who doesn't know you is trying to describe you, the first thing he says is "He wears glasses"; so that accessory detail, which two weeks earlier was completely unknown to you, becomes your prime attribute, is identified with your very existence. To Amilcare—foolishly, if you like—becoming all at once someone who "wears glasses" was a bit irritating. But that wasn't the real trouble : it was that once you begin to suspect that everything concerning you is purely casual, subject to transformation, and that you could be completely different and it wouldn't matter at all, then, following this line of reasoning, you come to think it's all the same whether you exist or don't exist, and from this notion to despair is only a brief step. Therefore Amilcare, when he had to select a kind of frame, instinctively chose some fine, very understated ear-



* * *



pieces, just a pair of thin silver hooks, to hold the naked lenses and connect them over the nose with a little bridge. But after a while, he realized he wasn't happy: if he inadvertently caught sight of himself in the mirror with his glasses on, he felt a keen dislike for his face, as if it were the typical face of a category of persons alien to him. It was precisely those glasses, so discreet, light, almost feminine, that made him look more than ever like "a man who wears glasses," one who had never done anything in his whole life but wear glasses, so that you now no longer even notice he wears them. They were becoming part of his physiognomy, those glasses, blending with his features, and so they were diminishing every natural contrast between what was his face—an ordinary face, but still a face—and what was an extraneous object, an industrial product.

He didn't love them, and so it wasn't long before they fell and broke. He bought another pair. This time his choice took the opposite direction: he selected a pair of black plastic frames an inch thick, with hinged corners that stuck out from the cheekbones like a horse's blinders, side pieces heavy enough to bend the ear. They were a kind of mask that hid half his face, but behind them he felt like himself: there was no doubt that he was one thing and the glasses another, completely separate; it was clear he was wearing glasses only incidentally and, without glasses, he was an entirely different man. Once again—insofar as his nature allowed it—he was happy.

In that period he happened to go to V. on business. The city of V. was Amilcare Carruga's birthplace, and there he had spent all his youth. He had left it, however, ten years before, and his trips back had become more and more brief



* * *



and sporadic; several years had gone by now since he last set foot there. You know how it is when you move away from a place where you've lived a long time: returning at long intervals, you feel disoriented; it seems that those sidewalks, those friends, those conversations in the café either must be everything or can no longer be anything; either you follow them day by day or else you are no longer able to participate in them, and the thought of reappearing after too long a time inspires a kind of remorse, and you dismiss it. And so Amilcare had gradually stopped seeking occasions for going back to V.; then, if occasions did arise, he let them pass; and in the end he actually avoided them. But in recent times, in this negative attitude toward his native city, there had been, beyond the motive just defined, also that sense of general disaffection that had come over him, which he had subsequently identified with the worsening of his nearsightedness. So now, finding himself in a new frame of mind thanks to the glasses, the first time a chance to go to V. presented itself, he seized it promptly, and went.

V. appeared to him in a totally different light from the last few times he had been there. But not because of its changes: true, the city had changed a great deal, new buildings everywhere, shops and cafés and movie theaters all different from before, the younger generation all strangers, and the traffic twice what it had been. All this newness, however, only underlined and made more recognizable what was old; in short, Amilcare Carruga managed for the first time to see the city again with the eyes of his boyhood, as if he had left it the day before. Thanks to his glasses he saw a host of insignificant details, a certain window, for example, a certain railing; or, rather, he was conscious of seeing



* * *



them, of distinguishing them from all the rest, whereas in the past he had merely seen them. To say nothing of the faces: a news vendor, a lawyer, some having aged, others still the same. Amilcare Carruga no longer had any real relatives in V., and his group of close friends had also dispersed long since. He did, however, have endless acquaintances: nothing else would have been possible in a city so small—as it had been in the days when he lived there—that, practically speaking, everybody knew everybody else, at least by sight. Now the population had grown a lot, here too—as everywhere in the well-to-do cities of the North—there had been a certain influx of Southerners, and the majority of the faces Amilcare encountered belonged to strangers. But for this very reason he enjoyed the satisfaction of recognizing at first glance the old inhabitants, and he recalled episodes, connections, nicknames. V. was one of those provincial cities where the tradition of an evening stroll along the main street still obtained; and in that, nothing had changed from Amilcare's day to the present. As always happens in these cases, one of the sidewalks was crammed with a steady flow of people; the other sidewalk less so. In their day, Amilcare and his friends, out of a kind of anticonformism, had always walked on the less popular sidewalk, from there casting glances and greetings and quips at the girls going by on the other. Now he felt as he had then, indeed even more excited, and he set off along his old sidewalk, looking at all the people who passed. Encountering familiar people this time didn't make him uneasy: it amused him, and he hastened to greet them. With some of them he would also have liked to stop and exchange a few words, but the main street of V. had sidewalks so narrow that the crowd of people kept shoving you forward, and, what's more, the



* * *



traffic of vehicles was now so much increased that you could no longer, as in the past, walk a bit in the middle of the street and cross it whenever you chose. In short, the stroll proceeded either too rushed or too slow, with no freedom of movement. Amilcare had to follow the current or struggle against it; and when he saw a familiar face he barely had time to wave a greeting before it vanished, and he could never be sure whether he had been seen or not.

Thus he ran into Corrado Strazza, his classmate and billiards companion for many years. Amilcare smiled at him and waved broadly. Corrado Strazza came forward, his gaze on him, but it was as if that gaze went right through him, and Corrado continued on his way. Was it possible he hadn't recognized Amilcare? Time had gone by, but Amilcare Carruga knew very well he hadn't changed much; so far he had warded off a paunch, as he had baldness, and his features had not been greatly altered. Here came Professor Cavanna. Amilcare gave him a deferential greeting, a little bow. At first the professor started to respond to it, instinctively, but then he stopped and looked around, as if seeking someone else. Professor Cavanna, who was famous for his visual memory! Because of all his many classes, he remembered faces and first and last names and even semester grades. Finally Ciccio Corba, the coach of the football team, returned Amilcare's greeting. But immediately afterward he blinked and began to whistle, as if realizing he had intercepted by mistake the greeting of a stranger, addressed to God knows what other person.

Amilcare became aware that nobody would recognize him. The eyeglasses that made the rest of the world visible to him, those eyeglasses in their enormous black frames, made him invisible. Who would ever think that behind that sort of mask



* * *



there was actually Amilcare Carruga, so long absent from V., whom no one was expecting to run into at any moment? He had barely managed to formulate these conclusions in his mind when Isa Maria Bietti appeared. She was with a girl friend, strolling and looking in shopwindows; Amilcare blocked her way and was about to cry "Isa Maria!" but his voice was paralyzed in his throat; Isa Maria Bietti pushed him aside with her elbow, said to her friend, "The way people behave nowadays ... ," and went on.

Not even Isa Maria Bietti had recognized him. He understood all of a sudden that it was only because of Isa Maria Bietti that he had come back, just as it was only because of Isa Maria Bietti that he had decided to leave V. and had stayed away so many years; everything, everything in his life and everything in the world, was only because of Isa Maria Bietti; and now finally he saw her again, their eyes met and Isa Maria Bietti didn't recognize him. In his great emotion, he hadn't noticed if she had changed, grown fat, aged, if she was attractive as ever, or less or more—he had seen nothing except that she was Isa Maria Bietti and that Isa Maria Bietti hadn't seen him.

He had reached the end of the stretch of the street frequented in the evening stroll. Here, at the corner with the ice-cream parlor, or a block farther on, at the newsstand, the people turned around and headed back along the sidewalk in the opposite direction. Amilcare Carruga also turned. He had taken off his glasses. Now the world had become once more that insipid cloud and he groped, groped with his eyes widened, and could bring nothing to the surface. Not that he didn't succeed in recognizing anyone: in the better-lighted places he was always within a hair's breadth of identifying a



* * *



face or two, but a shadow of doubt that perhaps this wasn't the person he thought always remained, and anyway, who it was or wasn't mattered little to him after all. Someone nodded, waved; this greeting might actually have been for him, but Amilcare couldn't quite tell who the person was. Another pair, too, greeted him as they went by; he was about to respond, but had no idea who they were. From the opposite sidewalk, one shouted a "Ciao, Carrù!" to him. To judge by the voice, it might have been a man named Stelvi. To his satisfaction, Amilcare realized they recognized him, they remembered him. The satisfaction was relative, because he couldn't even see them, or else couldn't manage to recognize them; they were persons who became confused in his memory, one with another, persons who basically were of little importance to him. "Good evening!" he said every so often, when he noticed a wave, a movement of the head. There, the one who had just greeted him must have been Bellintusi or Carretti, or Strazza. If it was Strazza, Amilcare would have liked perhaps to stop a moment with him and talk. But by now he had returned the greeting rather hastily; and, when he thought about it, it seemed natural that their relations should be like this, conventional and hurried greetings.

His looking around, however, clearly had one purpose: to track down Isa Maria Bietti. She was wearing a red coat, so she could be sighted at a distance. For a while Amilcare followed a red coat, but when he managed to pass it he saw that it wasn't she, and meanwhile those other two red coats had gone past in the other direction. That year medium-weight red coats were all the fashion. Earlier, for example, in the same coat, he had seen Gigina, the one from the tobacco shop. Now he began to suspect that it hadn't been Gigina from the



* * *



tobacco shop but had really been Isa Maria Bietti! But how was it possible to mistake Isa Maria for Gigina? Amilcare retraced his steps to make sure. He came upon Gigina; this was she, no doubt about it. But if she was now coming this way, she couldn't have covered the whole distance; or had she made a shorter circuit? He was completely at sea. If Isa Maria had greeted him and he had responded coldly, his whole journey, all his waiting, all those years had gone by in vain. Amilcare went back and forth along those sidewalks, sometimes putting on his glasses, sometimes taking them off, sometimes greeting everyone and sometimes receiving the greetings of foggy, anonymous ghosts.

Beyond the other extreme of the stroll, the street continued and was soon beyond the city limits. There was a row of trees, a ditch, a hedge and the fields. In his day, you came out here in the evening with your girl on your arm, if you had a girl; or else, if you were alone, you came here to be even more alone, to sit on a bench and listen to the crickets sing. Amilcare Carruga went on in that direction; now the city extended a bit farther, but not much. There was the bench, the ditch, the crickets, as before. Amilcare Carruga sat down. Of that whole landscape the night left only some great swaths of shadow. Whether he put on or took off his eyeglasses here, it was really all the same. Amilcare Carruga realized that perhaps the thrill of his new glasses had been the last of his life, and now it was over.



* * *



THE ADVENTURE OF A POET

The little island had a high, rocky shoreline. On it grew the thick, low scrub, the vegetation that survives by the sea. Gulls flew in the sky. It was a small island near the coast, deserted, uncultivated: in half an hour you could circle it in a rowboat, or in a rubber dinghy like the one the approaching couple had, the man calmly paddling, the woman stretched out, taking the sun. As they came nearer, the man listened intently.

"What do you hear?" she asked.

"Silence," he said. "Islands have a silence you can hear."

In fact, every silence consists of the network of minuscule sounds that enfolds it: the silence of the island was distinct from that of the calm sea surrounding it because it was pervaded by a vegetable rustling, the calls of birds, or a sudden whirr of wings.

Down below the rock, the water, without a ripple these days, was a sharp, limpid blue, penetrated to its depths by the sun's rays. In the cliff faces the mouths of grottoes opened, and the couple in the rubber boat were going lazily to explore them.



* * *



It was a coast in the South, still hardly affected by tourism, and these two were bathers who came from elsewhere. He was one Usnelli, a fairly well known poet; she, Delia H., a very beautiful woman.

Delia was an admirer of the South, passionate, even fanatical, and, lying in the boat, she talked with constant ecstasy about everything she was seeing, and perhaps also with a hint of hostility toward Usnelli, who was new to those places and, it seemed to her, did not share her enthusiasm as much as he should have.

"Wait," Usnelli said, "wait."

"Wait for what?" she said. "What could be more beautiful than this?"

He, distrustful (by nature and through his literary education) of emotions and words already the property of others, accustomed more to discovering hidden and spurious beauties than those that were evident and indisputable, was still nervous and tense. Happiness, for Usnelli, was a suspended condition, to be lived holding your breath. Ever since he began loving Delia, he had seen his cautious, sparing relationship with the world endangered; but he wished to renounce nothing, either of himself or of the happiness that opened before him. Now he was on guard, as if every degree of perfection that nature achieved around him—a decanting of the blue of the water, a languishing of the coast's green into gray, the glint of a fish's fin at the very spot where the sea's expanse was smoothest—were only heralding another, higher, degree, and so on to the point where the invisible line of the horizon would part like an oyster revealing all of a sudden a different planet or a new word.

They entered a grotto. It began spaciously, like an interior



* * *



lake of pale green, under a broad vault of rock. Farther on, it narrowed to a dark passage. The man with the paddle turned the dinghy around to enjoy the various effects of the light. The light from outside, through the jagged aperture, dazzled with colors made more vivid by the contrast. The water there sparkled, and the shafts of light ricocheted upward, in conflict with the soft shadows that spread from the rear. Reflections and flashes communicated to the rock walls and the vault the instability of the water.

"Here you understand the gods," the woman said.

"Hum," Usnelli said. He was nervous. His mind, accustomed to translating sensations into words, was now helpless, unable to formulate a single one.

They went farther in. The dinghy passed a shoal, a hump of rock at the level of the water; now the dinghy floated among rare glints that appeared and disappeared at every stroke of the paddle, the rest was dense shadow; the paddle now and then struck a wall. Delia, looking back, saw the blue orb of the open sky constantly change outline.

"A crab! Huge! Over there!" she cried, sitting up.

"... ab! ... ere!" the echo sounded.

"The echo!" she said, pleased, and started shouting words under those grim vaults: invocations, lines of verse.

"You, too! You shout, too! Make a wish!" she said to Usnelli.

"Hoooo...." Usnelli shouted. "Heeey ... Echoooo....."

Now and then the boat scraped. The darkness was deeper.

"I'm afraid. God knows what animals...."

"We can still get through."

Usnelli realized that he was heading for the darkness like a fish of the depths who flees sunlit water.

"I'm afraid; let's go back," she insisted.



* * *



To him, too, basically, any taste for the horrid was alien. He paddled backward. As they returned to where the cavern broadened, the sea became cobalt.

"Are there any octopuses?" Delia asked.

"You'd see them. The water's so clear."

"I'll have a swim, then."

She slipped over the side of the dinghy, let go, swam in that underground lake, and her body at times seemed white (as if that light stripped it of any color of its own) and at times as blue as that screen of water.

Usnelli had stopped rowing; he was still holding his breath. For him, being in love with Delia had always been like this, as in the mirror of this cavern: in a world beyond words. For that matter, in all his poems he had never written a verse of love : not one.

"Come closer," Delia said. As she swam, she had taken off the scrap of clothing covering her bosom; she threw it into the dinghy. "Just a minute." She also undid the piece of cloth tied at her hips and handed it to Usnelli.

Now she was naked. The whiter skin of her bosom and hips was hardly distinct, because her whole person gave off that pale-blue glow, like a medusa. She was swimming on one side, with a lazy movement, her head (the expression firm, almost ironic, a statue's) just out of the water, and at times the curve of a shoulder and the soft line of an extended arm. The other arm, in caressing strokes, covered and revealed the high bosom, taut at its tips. Her legs barely struck the water, supporting the smooth belly, marked by the navel like a faint print on the sand, and the star as of some mollusk. The sun's rays, reflected underwater, grazed her, making a kind of garment for her, or stripping her all over again.



* * *



Her swimming turned into a kind of dance movement; suspended in the water, smiling at him, she stretched out her arms in a soft rolling of the shoulders and wrists, or with a thrust of the knee she brought to the surface an arched foot, like a little fish.

Usnelli, in the boat, was all eyes. He understood that what life was now giving him was something not everyone has the privilege of looking at open-eyed, as if at the most dazzling core of the sun. And in the core of this sun was silence. Nothing that was there at this moment could be translated into anything else, perhaps not even into a memory.

Now Delia was swimming on her back, surfacing toward the sun, at the mouth of the cavern, proceeding with a light movement of her arms toward the open; and beneath her the water was changing its shade of blue, becoming paler and paler, more and more luminous.

"Watch out! Put something on! The boats come close out there!"

Delia was already among the rocks, beneath the sky. She slipped underwater, held out her arm. Usnelli handed her those skimpy bits of garment; she fastened them on, still swimming, and climbed back into the dinghy.

The approaching boats were fishermen's. Usnelli recognized them, part of that group of poor men who spent the fishing season on that beach, sleeping against certain rocks. He moved toward them. The man at the oars was the young one, grim with a toothache, a white sailor's cap pulled over his narrowed eyes, rowing in jerks as if every effort helped him feel the pain less; father of five children; a desperate case. The old man was at the poop; his Mexican-style straw hat crowned his whole lanky figure with a fringed halo; his round eyes,



* * *



once perhaps widened in arrogant pride, now in drunkard's clowning; his mouth open beneath the still-black, drooping mustache. With a knife he was cleaning the mullet they had caught.

"Caught much?" Delia cried.

"What little there is," they answered. "Bad year."

Delia liked to talk with the local inhabitants. Not Usnelli. ("With them," he said, "I don't have an easy conscience." He would shrug, and leave it at that.)

Now the dinghy was alongside the boat, where the faded paint was streaked with cracks, curling in short segments. The oar tied with a length of rope to the peg oarlock creaked at every turn against the worn wood of the side; and a little rusty anchor with four hooks had got tangled, under the narrow plank seat, in one of the wicker-basket traps, bearded with reddish seaweed, dried out God knows how long before; over the pile of nets dyed with tannin and dotted at the edge with round slices of cork, the gasping fish glinted in their pungent dress of scales, dull gray or pale blue; the gills, still throbbing, displayed, below, a red triangle of blood.

Usnelli remained silent, but this anguish of the human world was the contrary of what the beauty of nature had been communicating to him a little earlier. There every word failed, while here there was a turmoil of words that crowded into his mind: words to describe every wart, every hair on the thin, ill-shaven face of the old fisherman, every silver scale of the mullet.

On shore, another boat had been pulled in, overturned, propped up on sawhorses; and below, from the shadow, emerged the soles of the bare feet of the sleeping men, those who had fished during the night; nearby, a woman, all in black cloth-



* * *



ing, faceless, was setting a pot over a seaweed fire, and a long trail of smoke was coming from it. The shore of that cove was of gray stones; those patches of faded, printed colors were the smocks of the playing children, the smaller watched over by older, whining sisters, while the bigger and livelier boys, wearing only shorts made from hand-me-down grown-ups' trousers, were running up and down between rocks and water. Farther on, a straight stretch of sandy beach began, white and deserted, which at one side disappeared into a sparse canebrake and untilled fields. A young man in his Sunday clothes—all black, even his hat—with a stick over his shoulder and a bundle hanging from it, was walking by the sea the length of that beach, the nails of his shoes marking the friable crust of sand : certainly a peasant or a shepherd from an inland village who had come down to the coast for some market or other and had taken the seaside path for the soothing breeze. The railroad showed its wires, its embankment, its poles and fence, then vanished into the tunnel, to begin again farther on, vanish once more, and once more emerge, like stitches in uneven sewing. Above the white-and-black highway markers, squat olive groves began to climb; and higher still, the mountains were bare, grazing land or shrubs or only stones. A village set in a cleft among those heights extended upward, the houses one on top of the other, separated by cobbled stair-streets, concave in the middle so that the trickle of mule refuse could flow down. And on the doorsteps of all those houses were numerous women, elderly or aged, and on the parapets, seated in a row, numerous men, old and young, all in white shirts; in the middle of those streets like stairways, the babies were playing on the ground and an older boy was lying across the path, his cheek against the step, sleeping there because it was a bit



* * *



cooler and less smelly than inside the house; and everywhere, lighting or circling, were clouds of flies, and on every wall and every festoon of newspaper around the fireplaces was the infinite spatter of fly excrement; and into Usnelli's mind came words and words, thick, woven one into another, with no space between the lines, until little by little they could no longer be distinguished; it was a tangle from which even the tiniest white spaces were vanishing and only the black remained, the most total black, impenetrable, desperate as a scream.







The Distance of the Moon




At one time, according to Sir George H. Darwin, the Moon was very close to the Earth. Then the tides gradually pushed her far away: the tides that the Moon herself causes in the Earth’s waters, where the Earth slowly loses energy.

How well I know! – old Qfwfq cried – the rest of you can’t remember, but I can. We had her on top of us all the time, that enormous Moon: when she was full – nights as bright as day, but with a butter-coloured light – it looked as if she were going to crush us; when she was new, she rolled around the sky like a black umbrella blown by the wind; and when she was waxing, she came forward with her horns so low she seemed about to stick into the peak of a promontory and get caught there. But the whole business of the Moon’s phases worked in a different way then: because the distances from the Sun were different, and the orbits, and the angle of something or other, I forget what; as for eclipses, with Earth and Moon stuck together the way they were, why, we had eclipses every minute: naturally, those two big monsters managed to put each other in the shade constantly, first one, then the other.

Orbit? Oh, elliptical, of course: for a while it would huddle against us and then it would take flight for a while. The tides, when the Moon swung closer, rose so high nobody could hold them back. There were nights when the Moon was full and very, very low, and the tide was so high that the Moon missed a ducking in the sea by a hair’s-breadth; well, let’s say a few yards anyway. Climb up on the Moon? Of course we did. All you had to do was row out to it in a boat and, when you were underneath, prop a ladder against her and scramble up.

The spot where the Moon was lowest, as she went by, was off the Zinc Cliffs. We used to go out with those little rowing boats they had in those days, round and flat, made of cork. They held quite a few of us: me, Captain Vhd Vhd, his wife, my deaf cousin, and sometimes little Xlthlx – she was twelve or so at that time. On those nights the water was very calm, so silvery it looked like mercury, and the fish in it, violet-coloured, unable to resist the Moon’s attraction, rose to the surface, all of them, and so did the octopuses and the saffron medusas. There was always a flight of tiny creatures – little crabs, squid, and even some weeds, light and filmy, and coral plants – that broke from the sea and ended up on the Moon, hanging down from that lime-white ceiling, or else they stayed in midair, a phosphorescent swarm we had to drive off, waving banana leaves at them.

This is how we did the job: in the boat we had a ladder: one of us held it, another climbed to the top, and a third, at the oars, rowed until we were right under the Moon; that’s why there had to be so many of us (I only mentioned the main ones). The man at the top of the ladder, as the boat approached the Moon, would become scared and start shouting: ‘Stop! Stop! I’m going to bang my head!’ That was the impression you had, seeing her on top of you, immense, and all rough with sharp spikes and jagged, saw-tooth edges. It may be different now, but then the Moon, or rather the bottom, the underbelly of the Moon, the part that passed closest to the Earth and almost scraped it, was covered with a crust of sharp scales. It had come to resemble the belly of a fish, and the smell too, as I recall, if not downright fishy, was faintly similar, like smoked salmon.

In reality, from the top of the ladder, standing erect on the last rung, you could just touch the Moon if you held your arms up. We had taken the measurements carefully (we didn’t yet suspect that she was moving away from us); the only thing you had to be very careful about was where you put your hands. I always chose a scale that seemed fast (we climbed up in groups of five or six at a time), then I would cling first with one hand, then with both, and immediately I would feel ladder and boat drifting away from below me, and the motion of the Moon would tear me from the Earth’s attraction. Yes, the Moon was so strong that she pulled you up; you realized this the moment you passed from one to the other: you had to swing up abruptly, with a kind of somersault, grabbing the scales, throwing your legs over your head, until your feet were on the Moon’s surface. Seen from the Earth, you looked as if you were hanging there with your head down, but for you, it was the normal position, and the only odd thing was that when you raised your eyes you saw the sea above you, glistening, with the boat and the others upside down, hanging like a bunch of grapes from the vine.

My cousin, the Deaf One, showed a special talent for making those leaps. His clumsy hands, as soon as they touched the lunar surface (he was always the first to jump up from the ladder), suddenly became deft and sensitive. They found immediately the spot where he could hoist himself up; in fact just the pressure of his palms seemed enough to make him stick to the satellite’s crust. Once I even thought I saw the Moon come towards him, as he held out his hands.

He was just as dextrous in coming back down to Earth, an operation still more difficult. For us, it consisted in jumping, as high as we could, our arms upraised (seen from the Moon, that is, because seen from the Earth it looked more like a dive, or like swimming downwards, arms at our sides), like jumping up from the Earth in other words, only now we were without the ladder, because there was nothing to prop it against on the Moon. But instead of jumping with his arms out, my cousin bent towards the Moon’s surface, his head down as if for a somersault, then made a leap, pushing with his hands. From the boat we watched him, erect in the air as if he were supporting the Moon’s enormous ball and were tossing it, striking it with his palms; then, when his legs came within reach, we managed to grab his ankles and pull him down on board.

Now, you will ask me what in the world we went up on the Moon for; I’ll explain it to you. We went to collect the milk, with a big spoon and a bucket. Moon-milk was very thick, like a kind of cream cheese. It formed in the crevices between one scale and the next, through the fermentation of various bodies and substances of terrestrial origin which had flown up from the prairies and forests and lakes, as the Moon sailed over them. It was composed chiefly of vegetal juices, tadpoles, bitumen, lentils, honey, starch crystals, sturgeon eggs, moulds, pollens, gelatinous matter, worms, resins, pepper, mineral salts, combustion residue. You had only to dip the spoon under the scales that covered the Moon’s scabby terrain, and you brought it out filled with that precious muck. Not in the pure state, obviously; there was a lot of refuse. In the fermentation (which took place as the Moon passed over the expanses of hot air above the deserts) not all the bodies melted; some remained stuck in it: fingernails and cartilage, bolts, sea horses, nuts and peduncles, shards of crockery, fish-hooks, at times even a comb. So this paste, after it was collected, had to be refined, filtered. But that wasn’t the difficulty: the hard part was transporting it down to the Earth. This is how we did it: we hurled each spoonful into the air with both hands, using the spoon as a catapult. The cheese flew, and if we had thrown it hard enough, it stuck to the ceiling, I mean the surface of the sea. Once there, it floated, and it was easy enough to pull it into the boat. In this operation, too, my deaf cousin displayed a special gift; he had strength and a good aim; with a single, sharp throw, he could send the cheese straight into a bucket we held up to him from the boat. As for me, I occasionally misfired; the contents of the spoon would fail to overcome the Moon’s attraction and they would fall back into my eye.

I still haven’t told you everything about the things my cousin was good at. That job of extracting lunar milk from the Moon’s scales was child’s play to him: instead of the spoon, at times he had only to thrust his bare hand under the scales, or even one finger. He didn’t proceed in any orderly way, but went to isolated places, jumping from one to the other, as if he were playing tricks on the Moon, surprising her, or perhaps tickling her. And wherever he put his hand, the milk spurted out as if from a nanny goat’s teats. So the rest of us had only to follow him and collect with our spoons the substance that he was pressing out, first here, then there, but always as if by chance, since the Deaf One’s movements seemed to have no clear, practical sense. There were places, for example, that he touched merely for the fun of touching them: gaps between two scales, naked and tender folds of lunar flesh. At times my cousin pressed not only his fingers but – in a carefully gauged leap – his big toe (he climbed on to the Moon barefoot) and this seemed to be the height of amusement for him, if we could judge by the chirping sounds that came from his throat as he went on leaping.

The soil of the Moon was not uniformly scaly, but revealed irregular bare patches of pale, slippery clay. These soft areas inspired the Deaf One to turn somersaults or to fly almost like a bird, as if he wanted to impress his whole body into the Moon’s pulp. As he ventured further in this way, we lost sight of him at one point. On the Moon there were vast areas we had never had any reason or curiosity to explore, and that was where my cousin vanished; I had suspected that all those somersaults and nudges he indulged in before our eyes were only a preparation, a prelude to something secret meant to take place in the hidden zones.

We fell into a special mood on those nights off the Zinc Cliffs: gay, but with a touch of suspense, as if inside our skulls, instead of the brain, we felt a fish, floating, attracted by the Moon. And so we navigated, playing and singing. The Captain’s wife played the harp; she had very long arms, silvery as eels on those nights, and armpits as dark and mysterious as sea urchins; and the sound of the harp was sweet and piercing, so sweet and piercing it was almost unbearable, and we were forced to let out long cries, not so much to accompany the music as to protect our hearing from it.

Transparent medusas rose to the sea’s surface, throbbed there a moment, then flew off, swaying towards the Moon. Little Xlthlx amused herself by catching them in midair, though it wasn’t easy. Once, as she stretched her little arms out to catch one, she jumped up slightly and was also set free. Thin as she was, she was an ounce or two short of the weight necessary for the Earth’s gravity to overcome the Moon’s attraction and bring her back: so she flew up among the medusas, suspended over the sea. She took fright, cried, then laughed and started playing, catching shellfish and minnows as they flew, sticking some into her mouth and chewing them. We rowed hard, to keep up with the child: the Moon ran off in her ellipse, dragging that swarm of marine fauna through the sky, and a train of long, entwined seaweeds, and Xlthlx hanging there in the midst. Her two wispy braids seemed to be flying on their own, outstretched towards the Moon; but all the while she kept wriggling and kicking at the air, as if she wanted to fight that influence, and her socks – she had lost her shoes in the fight – slipped off her feet and swayed, attracted by the Earth’s force. On the ladder, we tried to grab them.

The idea of eating the little animals in the air had been a good one; the more weight Xlthlx gained, the more she sank towards the Earth; in fact, since among those hovering bodies hers was the largest, molluscs and seaweeds and plankton began to gravitate about her, and soon the child was covered with siliceous little shells, chitinous carapaces and fibres of sea plants. And the further she vanished into that tangle, the more she was freed of the Moon’s influence, until she grazed the surface of the water and sank into the sea.

We rowed quickly, to pull her out and save her: her body had remained magnetized, and we had to work hard to scrape off all the things encrusted on her. Tender corals were wound about her head, and every time we ran the comb through her hair there was a shower of crayfish and sardines; her eyes were sealed shut by limpets clinging to the lids with their suckers; squids’ tentacles were coiled around her arms and her neck; and her little dress now seemed woven only of weeds and sponges. We got the worst of it off her, but for weeks afterwards she went on pulling out fins and shells, and her skin, dotted with little diatoms, remained affected for ever, looking – to someone who didn’t observe her carefully – as if it were faintly dusted with freckles.

This should give you an idea of how the influences of Earth and Moon, practically equal, fought over the space between them. I’ll tell you something else: a body that descended to the Earth from the satellite was still charged for a while with lunar force and rejected the attraction of our world. Even I, big and heavy as I was: every time I had been up there, I took a while to get used to the Earth’s up and its down, and the others would have to grab my arms and hold me, clinging in a bunch in the swaying boat while I still had my head hanging and my legs stretching up towards the sky.

‘Hold on! Hold on to us!’ they shouted at me, and in all that groping, sometimes I ended up by seizing one of Mrs Vhd Vhd’s breasts, which were round and firm and the contact was good and secure and had an attraction as strong as the Moon’s or even stronger, especially if I managed, as I plunged down, to put my other arm around her hips, and with this I passed back into our world and fell with a thud into the bottom of the boat, where Captain Vhd Vhd brought me around, throwing a bucket of water in my face.

This is how the story of my love for the Captain’s wife began, and my suffering. Because it didn’t take me long to realize whom the lady kept looking at insistently: when my cousin’s hands clasped the satellite, I watched Mrs Vhd Vhd, and in her eyes I could read the thoughts that the deaf man’s familiarity with the Moon were arousing in her; and when he disappeared in his mysterious lunar explorations, I saw her become restless, as if on pins and needles, and then it was all clear to me, how Mrs Vhd Vhd was becoming jealous of the Moon and I was jealous of my cousin. Her eyes were made of diamonds, Mrs Vhd Vhd’s; they flared when she looked at the Moon, almost challengingly, as if she were saying: ‘You shan’t have him!’ And I felt like an outsider.

The one who least understood all of this was my deaf cousin. When we helped him down, pulling him – as I explained to you – by his legs, Mrs Vhd Vhd lost all her self-control, doing everything she could to take his weight against her own body, folding her long silvery arms around him; I felt a pang in my heart (the times I clung to her, her body was soft and kind, but not thrust forward, the way it was with my cousin), while he was indifferent, still lost in his lunar bliss.

I looked at the Captain, wondering if he also noticed his wife’s behaviour; but there was never a trace of any expression on that face of his, eaten by brine, marked with tarry wrinkles. Since the Deaf One was always the last to break away from the Moon, his return was the signal for the boats to move off. Then, with an unusually polite gesture, Vhd Vhd picked up the harp from the bottom of the boat and handed it to his wife. She was obliged to take it and play a few notes. Nothing could separate her more from the Deaf One than the sound of the harp. I took to singing in a low voice that sad song that goes: ‘Every shiny fish is floating, floating; and every dark fish is at the bottom, at the bottom of the sea …’ and all the others, except my cousin, echoed my words.

Every month, once the satellite had moved on, the Deaf One returned to his solitary detachment from the things of the world; only the approach of the full moon aroused him again. That time I had arranged things so it wasn’t my turn to go up, I could stay in the boat with the Captain’s wife. But then, as soon as my cousin had climbed the ladder, Mrs Vhd Vhd said: ‘This time I want to go up there, too!’

This had never happened before; the Captain’s wife had never gone up on the Moon. But Vhd Vhd made no objection, in fact he almost pushed her up the ladder bodily, exclaiming: ‘Go ahead then!’ and we all started helping her, and I held her from behind, felt her round and soft on my arms, and to hold her up I began to press my face and the palms of my hands against her, and when I felt her rising into the Moon’s sphere I was heartsick at that lost contact, so I started to rush after her, saying: ‘I’m going to go up for a while, too, to help out!’

I was held back as if in a vice. ‘You stay here; you have work to do later,’ the Captain commanded, without raising his voice.

At that moment each one’s intentions were already clear. And yet I couldn’t figure things out; even now I’m not sure I’ve interpreted it all correctly. Certainly the Captain’s wife had for a long time been cherishing the desire to go off privately with my cousin up there (or at least to prevent him from going off alone with the Moon), but probably she had a still more ambitious plan, one that would have to be carried out in agreement with the Deaf One: she wanted the two of them to hide up there together and stay on the Moon for a month. But perhaps my cousin, deaf as he was, hadn’t understood anything of what she had tried to explain to him, or perhaps he hadn’t even realized that he was the object of the lady’s desires. And the Captain? He wanted nothing better than to be rid of his wife; in fact, as soon as she was confined up there, we saw him give free rein to his inclinations and plunge into vice, and then we understood why he had done nothing to hold her back. But had he known from the beginning that the Moon’s orbit was widening?

None of us could have suspected it. The Deaf One perhaps, but only he: in the shadowy way he knew things, he may have had a presentiment that he would be forced to bid the Moon farewell that night. This is why he hid in his secret places and reappeared only when it was time to come back down on board. It was no use for the Captain’s wife to try to follow him: we saw her cross the scaly zone various times, length and breadth, then suddenly she stopped, looking at us in the boat, as if about to ask us whether we had seen him.

Surely there was something strange about that night. The sea’s surface, instead of being taut as it was during the full moon, or even arched a bit towards the sky, now seemed limp, sagging, as if the lunar magnet no longer exercised its full power. And the light, too, wasn’t the same as the light of other full moons; the night’s shadows seemed somehow to have thickened. Our friends up there must have realized what was happening; in fact, they looked up at us with frightened eyes. And from their mouths and ours, at the same moment, came a cry: ‘The Moon’s going away!’

The cry hadn’t died out when my cousin appeared on the Moon, running. He didn’t seem frightened, or even amazed: he placed his hands on the terrain, flinging himself into his usual somersault, but this time after he had hurled himself into the air he remained suspended, as little Xlthlx had. He hovered a moment between Moon and Earth, upside down, then laboriously moving his arms, like someone swimming against a current, he headed with unusual slowness towards our planet.

From the Moon the other sailors hastened to follow his example. Nobody gave a thought to getting the Moon-milk that had been collected into the boats, nor did the Captain scold them for this. They had already waited too long, the distance was difficult to cross by now; when they tried to imitate my cousin’s leap or his swimming, they remained there groping, suspended in midair. ‘Cling together! Idiots! Cling together!’ the Captain yelled. At this command, the sailors tried to form a group, a mass, to push all together until they reached the zone of the Earth’s attraction: all of a sudden a cascade of bodies plunged into the sea with a loud splash.

The boats were now rowing to pick them up. ‘Wait! The Captain’s wife is missing!’ I shouted. The Captain’s wife had also tried to jump, but she was still floating only a few yards from the Moon, slowly moving her long, silvery arms in the air. I climbed up the ladder, and in a vain attempt to give her something to grasp I held the harp out towards her. ‘I can’t reach her! We have to go after her!’ and I started to jump up, brandishing the harp. Above me the enormous lunar disc no longer seemed the same as before: it had become much smaller, it kept contracting, as if my gaze were driving it away, and the emptied sky gaped like an abyss where, at the bottom, the stars had begun multiplying, and the night poured a river of emptiness over me, drowned me in dizziness and alarm.

‘I’m afraid,’ I thought. ‘I’m too afraid to jump. I’m a coward!’ and at that moment I jumped. I swam furiously through the sky, and held the harp out to her, and instead of coming towards me she rolled over and over, showing me first her impassive face and then her backside.

‘Hold tight to me!’ I shouted, and I was already overtaking her, entwining my limbs with hers. ‘If we cling together we can go down!’ and I was concentrating all my strength on uniting myself more closely with her, and I concentrated my sensations as I enjoyed the fullness of that embrace. I was so absorbed I didn’t realize at first that I was, indeed, tearing her from her weightless condition, but was making her fall back on the Moon. Didn’t I realize it? Or had that been my intention from the very beginning? Before I could think properly, a cry was already bursting from my throat. ‘I’ll be the one to stay with you for a month!’ Or rather, ‘On you!’ I shouted, in my excitement: ‘On you for a month!’ and at that moment our embrace was broken by our fall to the Moon’s surface, where we rolled away from each other among those cold scales.

I raised my eyes as I did every time I touched the Moon’s crust, sure that I would see above me the native sea like an endless ceiling, and I saw it, yes, I saw it this time, too, but much higher, and much more narrow, bound by its borders of coasts and cliffs and promontories, and how small the boats seemed, and how unfamiliar my friends’ faces and how weak their cries! A sound reached me from nearby: Mrs Vhd Vhd had discovered her harp and was caressing it, sketching out a chord as sad as weeping.

A long month began. The Moon turned slowly around the Earth. On the suspended globe we no longer saw our familiar shore, but the passage of oceans as deep as abysses and deserts of glowing lapilli, and continents of ice, and forests writhing with reptiles, and the rocky walls of mountain chains gashed by swift rivers, and swampy cities, and stone graveyards, and empires of clay and mud. The distance spread a uniform colour over everything: the alien perspectives made every image alien; herds of elephants and swarms of locusts ran over the plains, so evenly vast and dense and thickly grown that there was no difference among them.

I should have been happy: as I had dreamed, I was alone with her, that intimacy with the Moon I had so often envied my cousin and with Mrs Vhd Vhd was now my exclusive prerogative, a month of days and lunar nights stretched uninterrupted before us, the crust of the satellite nourished us with its milk, whose tart flavour was familiar to us, we raised our eyes up, up to the world where we had been born, finally traversed in all its various expanse, explored landscapes no Earth-being had ever seen, or else we contemplated the stars beyond the Moon, big as pieces of fruit, made of light, ripened on the curved branches of the sky, and everything exceeded my most luminous hopes, and yet, and yet, it was, instead, exile.

I thought only of the Earth. It was the Earth that caused each of us to be that someone he was rather than someone else; up there, wrested from the Earth, it was as if I were no longer that I, nor she that She, for me. I was eager to return to the Earth, and I trembled at the fear of having lost it. The fulfilment of my dream of love had lasted only that instant when we had been united, spinning between Earth and Moon; torn from its earthly soil, my love now knew only the heart-rending nostalgia for what it lacked: a where, a surrounding, a before, an after.

This is what I was feeling. But she? As I asked myself, I was torn by my fears. Because if she also thought only of the Earth, this could be a good sign, a sign that she had finally come to understand me, but it could also mean that everything had been useless, that her longings were directed still and only towards my deaf cousin. Instead, she felt nothing. She never raised her eyes to the old planet, she went off, pale, among those wastelands, mumbling dirges and stroking her harp, as if completely identified with her temporary (as I thought) lunar state. Did this mean I had won out over my rival? No; I had lost: a hopeless defeat. Because she had finally realized that my cousin loved only the Moon, and the only thing she wanted now was to become the Moon, to be assimilated into the object of that extrahuman love.

When the Moon had completed its circling of the planet, there we were again over the Zinc Cliffs. I recognized them with dismay: not even in my darkest previsions had I thought the distance would have made them so tiny. In that mud puddle of the sea, my friends had set forth again, without the now useless ladders; but from the boats rose a kind of forest of long poles; everybody was brandishing one, with a harpoon or a grappling hook at the end, perhaps in the hope of scraping off a last bit of Moon-milk or of lending some kind of help to us wretches up there. But it was soon clear that no pole was long enough to reach the Moon; and they dropped back, ridiculously short, humbled, floating on the sea; and in that confusion some of the boats were thrown off balance and overturned. But just then, from another vessel a longer pole, which till then they had dragged along on the water’s surface, began to rise: it must have been made of bamboo, of many, many bamboo poles stuck one into the other, and to raise it they had to go slowly because – thin as it was – if they let it sway too much it might break. Therefore, they had to use it with great strength and skill, so that the wholly vertical weight wouldn’t rock the boat.

Suddenly it was clear that the tip of that pole would touch the Moon, and we saw it graze, then press against the scaly terrain, rest there a moment, give a kind of little push, or rather a strong push that made it bounce off again, then come back and strike that same spot as if on the rebound, then move away once more. And I recognized, we both – the Captain’s wife and I – recognized my cousin: it couldn’t have been anyone else, he was playing his last game with the Moon, one of his tricks, with the Moon on the tip of his pole as if he were juggling with her. And we realized that his virtuosity had no purpose, aimed at no practical result, indeed you would have said he was driving the Moon away, that he was helping her departure, that he wanted to show her to her more distant orbit. And this, too, was just like him: he was unable to conceive desires that went against the Moon’s nature, the Moon’s course and destiny, and if the Moon now tended to go away from him, then he would take delight in this separation just as, till now, he had delighted in the Moon’s nearness.

What could Mrs Vhd Vhd do, in the face of this? It was only at this moment that she proved her passion for the deaf man hadn’t been a frivolous whim but an irrevocable vow. If what my cousin now loved was the distant Moon, then she too would remain distant, on the Moon. I sensed this, seeing that she didn’t take a step towards the bamboo pole, but simply turned her harp towards the Earth, high in the sky, and plucked the strings. I say I saw her, but to tell the truth I only caught a glimpse of her out of the corner of my eye, because the minute the pole had touched the lunar crust, I had sprung and grasped it, and now, fast as a snake, I was climbing up the bamboo knots, pushing myself along with jerks of my arms and knees, light in the rarefied space, driven by a natural power that ordered me to return to the Earth, oblivious of the motive that had brought me here, or perhaps more aware of it than ever and of its unfortunate outcome; and already my climb up the swaying pole had reached the point where I no longer had to make any effort but could just allow myself to slide, head first, attracted by the Earth, until in my haste the pole broke into a thousand pieces and I fell into the sea, among the boats.

My return was sweet, my home refound, but my thoughts were filled only with grief at having lost her, and my eyes gazed at the Moon, for ever beyond my reach, as I sought her. And I saw her. She was there where I had left her, lying on a beach directly over our heads, and she said nothing. She was the colour of the Moon; she held the harp at her side and moved one hand now and then in slow arpeggios. I could distinguish the shape of her bosom, her arms, her thighs, just as I remember them now, just as now, when the Moon has become that flat, remote circle, I still look for her as soon as the first sliver appears in the sky, and the more it waxes, the more clearly I imagine I can see her, her or something of her, but only her, in a hundred, a thousand different vistas, she who makes the Moon the Moon and, whenever she is full, sets the dogs to howling all night long, and me with them.





At Daybreak




The planets of the solar system, G. P. Kuiper explains, began to solidify in the darkness, through the condensation of a fluid, shapeless nebula. All was cold and dark. Later the Sun began to become more concentrated until it was reduced almost to its present dimensions, and in this process the temperature rose and rose, to thousands of degrees, and the Sun started emitting radiations in space.

Pitch-dark it was – old Qfwfq confirmed – I was only a child, I can barely remember it. We were there, as usual, with Father and Mother, Granny Bb’b, some uncles and aunts who were visiting, Mr Hnw, the one who later became a horse, and us little ones. I think I’ve told you before the way we lived on the nebulae: it was like lying down, we were flat and very still, turning as they turned. Not that we were lying outside, you understand, on the nebula’s surface; no, it was too cold out there. We were underneath, as if we had been tucked in under a layer of fluid, grainy matter. There was no way of telling time; whenever we started counting the nebula’s turns there were disagreements, because we didn’t have any reference points in the darkness, and we ended up arguing. So we preferred to let the centuries flow by as if they were minutes; there was nothing to do but wait, keep covered as best we could, doze, speak out now and then to make sure we were all still there; and, naturally, scratch ourselves; because – they can say what they like – all those particles spinning around had only one effect, a troublesome itching.

What we were waiting for, nobody could have said; to be sure, Granny Bb’b remembered back to the times when matter was uniformly scattered in space, and there was heat and light; even allowing for all the exaggerations there must have been in those old folks’ tales, those times had surely been better in some ways, or at least different; but as far as we were concerned, we just had to get through that enormous night.

My sister G’d(w) n fared the best, thanks to her introverted nature: she was a shy girl and she loved the dark. For herself, G’d(w) n always chose to stay in places that were a bit removed, at the edge of the nebula, and she would contemplate the blackness, and toy with the little grains of dust in tiny cascades, and talk to herself, with faint bursts of laughter that were like tiny cascades of dust, and – waking or sleeping – she abandoned herself to dreams. They weren’t dreams like ours (in the midst of the darkness, we dreamed of more darkness, because nothing else came into our minds); no, she dreamed – from what we could understand of her ravings – of a darkness a hundred times deeper and more various and velvety.

My father was the first to notice something was changing. I had dozed off, when his shout wakened me: ‘Watch out! We’re hitting something!’

Beneath us, the nebula’s matter, instead of fluid as it had always been, was beginning to condense.

To tell the truth, my mother had been tossing and turning for several hours, saying: ‘Uff, I just can’t seem to make myself comfortable here!’ In other words, according to her, she had become aware of a change in the place where she was lying: the dust wasn’t the same as it had been before, soft, elastic, uniform, so you could wallow in it as much as you liked without leaving any print; instead, a kind of rut or furrow was being formed, especially where she was accustomed to resting all her weight. And she thought she could feel underneath her something like granules or blobs or bumps; which perhaps, after all, were buried hundreds of miles further down and were pressing through all those layers of soft dust. Not that we generally paid much attention to these premonitions of my mother’s: poor thing, for a hypersensitive creature like herself, and already well along in years, our way of life then was hardly ideal for the nerves.

And then it was my brother Rwzfs, an infant at the time; at a certain point I felt him – who knows? – slamming or digging or writhing in some way, and I asked: ‘What are you doing?’ And he said: ‘I’m playing.’

‘Playing? With what?’

‘With a thing,’ he said.

You understand? It was the first time. There had never been things to play with before. And how could we have played? With that pap of gaseous matter? Some fun: that sort of stuff was all right perhaps for my sister G’d(w) n. If Rwzfs was playing, it meant he had found something new: in fact, afterwards, exaggerating as usual, they said he had found a pebble. It wasn’t a pebble, but it was surely a collection of more solid matter or – let’s say – something less gaseous. He was never very clear on this point; that is, he told stories, as they occurred to him, and when the period came when nickel was formed and nobody talked of anything but nickel, he said: ‘That’s it: it was nickel. I was playing with some nickel!’ So afterwards he was always called ‘Nickel Rwzfs’. (It wasn’t, as some say now, that he had turned into nickel, unable – retarded as he was – to go beyond the mineral phase; it was a different thing altogether, and I only mention this out of love for truth, not because he was my brother: he had always been a bit backward, true enough, but not of the metallic type, if anything a bit colloidal; in fact, when he was still very young, he married an alga, one of the first, and we never heard from him again.)

In short, it seemed everyone had felt something: except me. Maybe it’s because I’m absent-minded. I heard – I don’t know whether awake or asleep – our father’s cry: ‘We’re hitting something!’, a meaningless expression (since before then nothing had ever hit anything, you can be sure), but one that took on meaning at the very moment it was uttered, that is, it meant the sensation we were beginning to experience, slightly nauseating, like a slab of mud passing under us, something flat, on which we felt we were bouncing. And I said, in a reproachful tone: ‘Oh, Granny!’

Afterwards I often asked myself why my first reaction was to become angry with our grandmother. Granny Bb’b, who clung to her habits of the old days, often did embarrassing things: she continued to believe that matter was in uniform expansion and, for example, that it was enough to throw refuse anywhere and it would rarefy and disappear into the distance. The fact that the process of condensation had begun some while ago, that is, that dirt thickened on particles so we weren’t able to get rid of it – she couldn’t get this into her head. So in some obscure way I connected this new fact of ‘hitting’ with some mistake my grandmother might have made and I let out that cry.

Then Granny Bb’b answered: ‘What is it? Have you found my cushion?’

This cushion was a little ellipsoid of galactic matter Granny had found somewhere or other during the first cataclysms of the universe; and she always carried it around with her, to sit on. At a certain point, during the great night, it had been lost, and she accused me of having hidden it from her. Now, it was true I had always hated that cushion, it seemed so vulgar and out of place on our nebula, but the most Granny could blame me for was not having guarded it always as she had wanted me to.

Even my father, who was always very respectful towards her, couldn’t help remarking: ‘Oh, see here, Mamma, something is happening – we don’t know what – and you go on about that cushion!’

‘Ah, I told you I couldn’t get to sleep!’ my mother said: another remark hardly appropriate to the situation.

At that point we heard a great ‘Pwack! Wack! Sgrr!’ and we realized that something must have happened to Mr Hnw: he was hawking and spitting for all he was worth.

‘Mr Hnw! Mr Hnw! Get hold of yourself! Where’s he got to now?’ my father started saying, and in that darkness, still without a ray of light, we managed to grope until we found him and could hoist him on to the surface of the nebula, where he caught his breath again. We laid him out on that external layer which was then taking on a clotted, slippery consistency.

‘Wrrak! This stuff closes on you!’ Mr Hnw tried to say, though he didn’t have a great gift for self-expression. ‘You go down and down, and you swallow! Skrrrack!’ He spat.

There was another novelty: if you weren’t careful, you could now sink on the nebula. My mother, with a mother’s instinct, was the first to realize it. And she cried: ‘Children: are you all there? Where are you?’

The truth was that we were a bit confused, and whereas before, when everything had been lying regularly for centuries, we were always careful not to scatter, now we had forgotten all about it.

‘Keep calm. Nobody must stray,’ my father said.

‘G’d(w) n! Where are you? And the twins? Has anybody seen the twins? Speak up!’

Nobody answered. ‘Oh, my goodness, they’re lost!’ Mother shouted. My little brothers weren’t yet old enough to know how to transmit any message: so they got lost easily and had to be watched over constantly. ‘I’ll go and look for them!’ I said.

‘Good for you, Qfwfq, yes, go!’ Father and Mother said, then, immediately repentant: ‘But if you do go, you’ll be lost, too! No, stay here. Oh, all right, go, but let us know where you are: whistle!’

I began to walk in the darkness, in the marshy condensation of that nebula, emitting a constant whistle. I say ‘walk’; I mean a way of moving over the surface, inconceivable until a few minutes earlier, and it was already an achievement to attempt it now, because the matter offered such little resistance that, if you weren’t careful, instead of proceeding on the surface you sank sideways or even vertically and were buried. But in whatever direction I went and at whatever level, the chances of finding the twins remained the same: who could guess where the two of them had got to?

All of a sudden I sprawled; as if they had – we would say today – tripped me up. It was the first time I had fallen, I didn’t know what ‘to fall’ was, but we were still on the softness and I didn’t hurt myself. ‘Don’t trample here,’ a voice said, ‘I don’t want you to, Qfwfq.’ It was the voice of my sister G’d(w) n.

‘Why? What’s there?’

‘I made some things with things …’ she said. It took me a while to realize, groping, that my sister, messing about with that sort of mud, had built up a little hill, all full of pinnacles, spires and battlements.

‘What have you done there?’

G’d(w) n never gave you a straight answer. ‘An outside with an inside in it.’

I continued my walk, falling every now and then. I also stumbled over the inevitable Mr Hnw, who was stuck in the condensing matter again, head first. ‘Come, Mr Hnw. Mr Hnw! Can’t you possibly stay erect?’ and I had to help him pull himself out once more, this time pushing him from below, because I was also completely immersed.

Mr Hnw, coughing and puffing and sneezing (it had never been so icy cold before), popped up on the surface at the very spot where Granny Bb’b was sitting. Granny flew into the air, immediately overcome with emotion: ‘My grandchildren! My grandchildren are back!’

‘No, no, Mamma. Look, it’s Mr Hnw!’ Everything was confused.

‘But the grandchildren?’

‘They’re here!’ I shouted, ‘and the cushion is here, too!’

The twins must long before have made a secret hiding place for themselves in the thickness of the nebula, and they had hidden the cushion there, to play with. As long as matter had been fluid, they could float in there and do somersaults through the round cushion, but now they were imprisoned in a kind of spongy cream: the cushion’s central hole was clogged up, and they felt crushed on all sides.

‘Hang on to the cushion,’ I tried to make them understand. ‘I’ll pull you out, you little fools!’ I pulled and pulled and, at a certain point, before they knew what was happening, they were already rolling about on the surface, now covered with a scabby film like the white of an egg. The cushion, instead, dissolved as soon as it emerged. There was no use trying to understand the phenomena that took place in those days; and there was no use trying to explain to Granny Bb’b.

Just then, as if they couldn’t have chosen a better moment, our visiting relatives got up slowly and said: ‘Well, it’s getting late; I wonder what our children are up to. We’re a little worried about them. It’s been nice seeing all of you again, but we’d better be getting along.’

Nobody could say they were wrong; in fact, they should have taken fright and run off long since; but these relations, perhaps because of the out-of-the-way place where they lived, were a bit gauche. Perhaps they had been on pins and needles all this time and hadn’t dared say so.

My father said: ‘Well, if you want to go, I won’t try to keep you. But think it over: maybe it would be wiser to stay until the situation’s cleared up a bit, because as things stand now, you don’t know what sort of risk you might be running.’ Good, common sense, in short.

But they insisted: ‘No, no, thanks all the same. It’s been a really nice get-together, but we won’t intrude on you any longer,’ and more nonsense of the sort. In other words, we may not have understood very much of the situation, but they had no notion of it at all.

There were three of them: an aunt and two uncles, all three very tall and practically identical; we never really understood which uncle was the husband and which the brother, or exactly how they were related to us: in those days there were many things that were left vague.

They began to go off, one at a time, each in a different direction, towards the black sky, and every now and then, as if to maintain contact, they cried: ‘Oh! Oh!’ They always acted like this: they weren’t capable of behaving with any sort of system.

They had hardly left when their cries of ‘Oh! Oh!’ could be heard from very distant points, though they ought to have been still only a few paces away. And we could also hear some exclamations of theirs, whose meaning we couldn’t understand: ‘Why, it’s hollow here!’ ‘You can’t get past this spot!’ ‘Then why don’t you come here?’ ‘Where are you?’ ‘Jump!’ ‘Fine! And what do I jump over?’ ‘Oh, but now we’re heading back again!’ In other words, everything was incomprehensible, except the fact that some enormous distances were stretching out between us and those relatives.

It was our aunt, the last to leave, whose yells made the most sense: ‘Here I am, all alone, stuck on top of a piece of this stuff that’s come loose …’

And the voices of the two uncles, weak now in the distance, repeated: ‘Fool … Fool … Fool …’

We were peering into this darkness, criss-crossed with voices, when the change took place: the only real, great change I’ve ever happened to witness, and compared to it the rest is nothing. I mean this thing that began at the horizon, this vibration which didn’t resemble those we then called sounds, or those now called the ‘hitting’ vibrations, or any others; a kind of eruption, distant surely, and yet, at the same time, it made what was close come closer; in other words, all the darkness was suddenly dark in contrast with something else that wasn’t darkness, namely light. As soon as we could make a more careful analysis of the situation, it turned out that: first, the sky was dark as before but was beginning to be not so dark; second, the surface where we were was all bumpy and crusty, an ice so dirty it was revolting, which was rapidly dissolving because the temperature was rising at full speed; and, third, there was what we would later have called a source of light, that is, a mass that was becoming incandescent, separated from us by an enormous empty space, and it seemed to be trying out all the colours one by one, in iridescent fits and starts. And there was more: in the midst of the sky, between us and that incandescent mass, a couple of islands, brightly lit and vague, which whirled in the void with our uncles on them and other people, reduced to distant shadows, letting out a kind of chirping noise.

So the better part was done: the heart of the nebula, contracting, had developed warmth and light, and now there was the Sun. All the rest went on revolving nearby, divided and clotted into various pieces, Mercury, Venus, the Earth, and others further on, and whoever was on them, stayed where he was. And, above all, it was deathly hot.

We stood there, open-mouthed, erect, except for Mr Hnw, who was on all fours, to be on the safe side. And my grandmother! How she laughed! As I said before, Granny Bb’b dated from the age of diffused luminosity, and all through this dark time she had kept saying that any minute things would go back the way they had been in the old days. Now her moment seemed to have come; for a while she tried to act casual, the sort of person who accepts anything that happens as perfectly natural; then, seeing we paid her no attention, she started laughing and calling us: ‘Bunch of ignorant louts … Know-nothings …’

She wasn’t speaking quite in good faith, however; unless her memory by then had begun to fail her. My father, understanding what little he did, said to her, prudently as always: ‘Mamma, I know what you mean, but really, this seems quite a different phenomenon …’ And he pointed to the terrain: ‘Look down!’ he exclaimed.

We lowered our eyes. The Earth which supported us was still a gelatinous, diaphanous mass, growing more and more firm and opaque, beginning from the centre where a kind of yolk was thickening; but still our eyes managed to penetrate through it, illuminated as it was by that first Sun. And in the midst of this kind of transparent bubble we saw a shadow moving, as if swimming and flying. And our mother said: ‘Daughter!’

We all recognized G’d(w) n: frightened perhaps by the Sun’s catching fire, following a reaction of her shy spirit, she had sunk into the condensing matter of the Earth, and now she was trying to clear a path for herself in the depths of the planet, and she looked like a gold and silver butterfly as she passed into a zone that was still illuminated and diaphanous or vanished into the sphere of shadow that was growing wider and wider.

‘G’d(w) n! G’d(w) n!’ we shouted and flung ourselves on the ground, also trying to clear a way, to reach her. But the Earth’s surface now was coagulating more and more into a porous husk, and my brother Rwzfs, who had managed to stick his head into a fissure, was almost strangled.

Then she was seen no more: the solid zone now occupied the whole central part of the planet. My sister had remained in there, and I never found out whether she had stayed buried in those depths or whether she had reached safety on the other side until I met her, much later, at Canberra in 1912, married to a certain Sullivan, a retired railwayman, so changed I hardly recognized her.

We got up. Mr Hnw and Granny were in front of us, crying, surrounded by pale blue-and-gold flames.

‘Rwzfs! Why have you set fire to Granny?’ Father began to scold, but, turning towards my brother, he saw that Rwzfs was also enveloped in flames. And so was my father, and my mother, too, and I – we were all burning in the fire. Or rather: we weren’t burning, we were immersed in it as in a dazzling forest; the flames shot high over the whole surface of the planet, a fiery air in which we could run and float and fly, and we were gripped by a kind of new joy.

The Sun’s radiations were burning the envelopes of the planets, made of helium and hydrogen: in the sky, where our uncles and aunt were, fiery globes spun, dragging after them long beards of gold and turquoise, as a comet drags its tail.

The darkness came back. By now we were sure that everything that could possibly happen had happened, and ‘yes, this is the end,’ Grandmother said, ‘mind what us old folks say …’ Instead, the Earth had merely made one of its turns. It was night. Everything was just beginning.





A Sign in Space




Situated in the external zone of the Milky Way, the Sun takes about two hundred million years to make a complete revolution of the galaxy.

Right, that’s how long it takes, not a day less – Qfwfq said – once, as I went past, I drew a sign at a point in space, just so I could find it again two hundred million years later, when we went by the next time around. What sort of sign? It’s hard to explain because if I say sign to you, you immediately think of a something that can be distinguished from a something else, but nothing could be distinguished from anything there; you immediately think of a sign made with some implement or with your hands, and then when you take the implement or your hands away, the sign remains, but in those days there were no implements or even hands, or teeth, or noses, all things that came along afterwards, a long time afterwards. As to the form a sign should have, you say it’s no problem because, whatever form it may be given, a sign only has to serve as a sign, that is, be different or else the same as other signs: here again it’s easy for you young ones to talk, but in that period I didn’t have any examples to follow, I couldn’t say I’ll make it the same or I’ll make it different, there were no things to copy, nobody knew what a line was, straight or curved, or even a dot, or a protuberance or a cavity. I conceived the idea of making a sign, that’s true enough, or rather, I conceived the idea of considering a sign a something that I felt like making, so when, at that point in space and not in another, I made something, meaning to make a sign, it turned out that I really had made a sign, after all.

In other words, considering it was the first sign ever made in the universe, or at least in the circuit of the Milky Way, I must admit it came out very well. Visible? What a question! Who had eyes to see with in those days? Nothing had ever been seen by anything, the question never even arose. Recognizable, yes, beyond any possibility of error: because all the other points in space were the same, indistinguishable, and instead, this one had the sign on it.

So as the planets continued their revolutions, and the solar system went on in its own, I soon left the sign far behind me, separated from it by the endless fields of space. And I couldn’t help thinking about when I would come back and encounter it again, and how I would know it, and how happy it would make me, in that anonymous expanse, after I had spent a hundred thousand light-years without meeting anything familiar, nothing for hundreds of centuries, for thousands of millennia; I’d come back and there it would be in its place, just as I had left it, simple and bare, but with that unmistakable imprint, so to speak, that I had given it.

Slowly the Milky Way revolved, with its fringe of constellations and planets and clouds, and the Sun along with the rest, towards the edge. In all that circling, only the sign remained still, in an ordinary spot, out of all the orbit’s reach (to make it, I had leaned over the border of the galaxy a little, so it would remain outside and all those revolving worlds wouldn’t crash into it), in an ordinary point that was no longer ordinary since it was the only point that was surely there, and which could be used as a reference point to distinguish other points.

I thought about it day and night; in fact, I couldn’t think about anything else; actually, this was the first opportunity I had had to think something; or I should say: to think something had never been possible, first because there were no things to think about, and second because signs to think of them by were lacking, but from the moment there was that sign, it was possible for someone thinking to think of a sign, and therefore that one, in the sense that the sign was the thing you could think about and also the sign of the thing thought, namely, itself.

So the situation was this: the sign served to mark a place but at the same time it meant that in that place there was a sign (something far more important because there were plenty of places but there was only one sign) and also at the same time that sign was mine, the sign of me, because it was the only sign I had ever made and I was the only one who had ever made signs. It was like a name, the name of that point, and also my name that I had signed on that spot; in short, it was the only name available for everything that required a name.

Transported by the sides of the galaxy, our world went navigating through distant spaces, and the sign stayed where I had left it to mark that spot, and at the same time it marked me, I carried it with me, it inhabited me, possessed me entirely, came between me and everything with which I might have attempted to establish a relationship. As I waited to come back and meet it again, I could try to derive other signs from it and combinations of signs, series of similar signs and contrasts of different signs. But already tens and tens of thousands of millennia had gone by since the moment when I had made it (rather, since the few seconds in which I had scrawled it down in the constant movement of the Milky Way) and now, just when I needed to bear in mind its every detail (the slightest uncertainty about its form made uncertain the possible distinctions between it and other signs I might make), I realized that, though I recalled its general outline, its overall appearance, still something about it eluded me, I mean if I tried to break it down into its various elements, I couldn’t remember whether, between one part and the other, it went like this or like that. I needed it there in front of me, to study, to consult, but instead it was still far away, I didn’t yet know how far, because I had made it precisely in order to know the time it would take me to see it again, and until I had found it once more, I wouldn’t know. Now, however, it wasn’t my motive in making it that mattered to me, but how it was made, and I started inventing hypotheses about this how, and theories according to which a certain sign had to be perforce in a certain way, or else, proceeding by exclusion, I tried to eliminate all the less probable types of sign to arrive at the right one, but all these imaginary signs vanished inevitably because that first sign was missing as a term of comparison. As I racked my brain like this (while the galaxy went on turning wakefully in its bed of soft emptiness and the atoms burned and radiated) I realized I had lost by now even that confused notion of my sign, and I succeeded in conceiving only interchangeable fragments of signs, that is, smaller signs within the large one, and every change of these signs-within-the-sign changed the sign itself into a completely different one; in short, I had completely forgotten what my sign was like and, try as I might, it wouldn’t come back to my mind.

Did I despair? No, this forgetfulness was annoying, but not irreparable. Whatever happened, I knew the sign was there waiting for me, quiet and still. I would arrive, I would find it again, and I would then be able to pick up the thread of my meditations. At a rough guess, I calculated we had completed half of our galactic revolution: I had only to be patient, the second half always seemed to go by more quickly. Now I just had to remember the sign existed and I would pass it again.

Day followed day, and then I knew I must be near. I was furiously impatient because I might encounter the sign at any moment. It’s here, no, a little further on, now I’ll count up to a hundred … Had it disappeared? Had we already gone past it? I didn’t know. My sign had perhaps remained who knows where, behind, completely remote from the revolutionary orbit of our system. I hadn’t calculated the oscillations to which, especially in those days, the celestial bodies’ fields of gravity were subject, and which caused them to trace irregular orbits, cut like the flower of a dahlia. For about a hundred millennia I tormented myself, going over my calculations: it turned out that our course touched that spot not every galactic year but only every three, that is, every six hundred million solar years. When you’ve waited two hundred million years, you can also wait six hundred; and I waited; the way was long but I wasn’t on foot, after all; astride the galaxy I travelled through the light-years, galloping over the planetary and stellar orbits as if I were on a horse whose shoes struck sparks; I was in a state of mounting excitement; I felt I was going forth to conquer the only thing that mattered to me, sign and dominion and name …

I made the second circuit, the third. I was there. I let out a yell. At a point which had to be that very point, in the place of my sign, there was a shapeless scratch, a bruised, chipped abrasion of space. I had lost everything: the sign, the point, the thing that caused me – being the one who had made the sign at that point – to be me. Space, without a sign, was once again a chasm, the void, without beginning or end, nauseating, in which everything – including me – was lost. (And don’t come telling me that, to fix a point, my sign and the erasure of my sign amounted to the same thing; the erasure was the negation of the sign, and therefore didn’t serve to distinguish one point from the preceding and successive points.)

I was disheartened and for many light-years I let myself be dragged along as if I were unconscious. When I finally raised my eyes (in the meanwhile, sight had begun in our world, and, as a result, also life), I saw what I would never have expected to see. I saw it, the sign, but not that one, a similar sign, a sign unquestionably copied from mine, but one I realized immediately couldn’t be mine, it was so squat and careless and clumsily pretentious, a wretched counterfeit of what I had meant to indicate with that sign whose ineffable purity I could only now – through contrast – recapture. Who had played this trick on me? I couldn’t figure it out. Finally, a plurimillennial chain of deductions led me to the solution: on another planetary system which performed its galactic revolution before us, there was a certain Kgwgk (the name I deduced afterwards, in the later era of names), a spiteful type, consumed with envy, who had erased my sign in a vandalistic impulse and then, with vulgar artifice, had attempted to make another.

It was clear that his sign had nothing to mark except Kgwgk’s intention to imitate my sign, which was beyond all comparison. But at that moment the determination not to let my rival get the better of me was stronger than any other desire; I wanted immediately to make a new sign in space, a real sign that would make Kgwgk die of envy. About seven hundred millions of years had gone by since I had first tried to make a sign, but I fell to work with a will. Now things were different, however, because the world, as I mentioned, was beginning to produce an image of itself, and in everything a form was beginning to correspond to a function, and the forms of that time, we believed, had a long future ahead of them (instead, we were wrong: take – to give you a fairly recent example – the dinosaurs), and therefore in this new sign of mine you could perceive the influence of our new way of looking at things, call it style if you like, that special way that everything had to be, there, in a certain fashion. I must say I was truly satisfied with it, and I no longer regretted that first sign that had been erased, because this one seemed vastly more beautiful to me.

But in the duration of that galactic year we already began to realize that the world’s forms had been temporary up until then, and that they would change, one by one. And this awareness was accompanied by a certain annoyance with the old images, so that even their memory was intolerable. I began to be tormented by a thought: I had left that sign in space, that sign which had seemed so beautiful and original to me and so suited to its function, and which now, in my memory, seemed inappropriate, in all its pretension, a sign chiefly of an antiquated way of conceiving signs and of my foolish acceptance of an order of things I ought to have been wise enough to break away from in time. In other words, I was ashamed of that sign which went on through the centuries, being passed by worlds in flight, making a ridiculous spectacle of itself and of me and of that temporary way we had had of seeing things. I blushed when I remembered it (and I remembered it constantly), blushes that lasted whole geological eras: to hide my shame I crawled into the craters of the volcanoes, in remorse I sank my teeth into the caps of the glaciations that covered the continents. I was tortured by the thought that Kgwgk, always preceding me in the circumnavigation of the Milky Way, would see the sign before I could erase it, and boor that he was, he would mock me and make fun of me, contemptuously repeating the sign in rough caricatures in every corner of the circumgalactic sphere.

Instead, this time the complicated astral timekeeping was in my favour. Kgwgk’s constellation didn’t encounter the sign, whereas our solar system turned up there punctually at the end of the first revolution, so close that I was able to erase the whole thing with the greatest care.

Now, there wasn’t a single sign of mine in space. I could start drawing another, but I knew that signs also allow others to judge the one who makes them, and that in the course of a galactic year tastes and ideas have time to change, and the way of regarding the earlier ones depends on what comes afterwards; in short, I was afraid a sign that now might seem perfect to me, in two hundred or six hundred million years would make me look absurd. Instead, in my nostalgia, the first sign, brutally rubbed out by Kgwgk, remained beyond the attacks of time and its changes, the sign created before the beginning of forms, which was to contain something that would have survived all forms, namely the fact of being a sign and nothing else.

Making signs that weren’t that sign no longer held any interest for me; and I had forgotten that sign now, billions of years before. So, unable to make true signs, but wanting somehow to annoy Kgwgk, I started making false signs, notches in space, holes, stains, little tricks that only an incompetent creature like Kgwgk could mistake for signs. And still he furiously got rid of them with his erasings (as I could see in later revolutions), with a determination that must have cost him much effort. (Now I scattered these false signs liberally through space, to see how far his simple-mindedness would go.)

Observing these erasures, one circuit after the next (the galaxy’s revolutions had now become for me a slow, boring voyage without goal or expectation), I realized something: as the galactic years passed the erasures tended to fade in space, and beneath them what I had drawn at those points, my false signs – as I called them – began to reappear. This discovery, far from displeasing me, filled me with new hope. If Kgwgk’s erasures were erased, the first he had made, there at that point, must have disappeared by now, and my sign must have returned to its pristine visibility!

So expectation was revived, to lend anxiety to my days. The galaxy turned like an omelette in its heated pan, itself both frying pan and golden egg; and I was frying, with it, in my impatience.

But, with the passing of the galactic years, space was no longer that uniformly barren and colourless expanse. The idea of fixing with signs the points where we passed – as it had come to me and to Kgwgk – had occurred to many, scattered over billions of planets of other solar systems, and I was constantly running into one of these things, or a pair, or even a dozen, simple two-dimensional scrawls, or else three-dimensional solids (polyhedrons, for example), or even things constructed with more care, with the fourth dimension and everything. So it happened that I reached the point of my sign, and I found five, all there. And I wasn’t able to recognize my own. It’s this one, no, that; no, no, that one seems too modern, but it could also be the most ancient; I don’t recognize my hand in that one, I would never have wanted to make it like that … And meanwhile the galaxy ran through space and left behind those signs old and new and I still hadn’t found mine.

I’m not exaggerating when I say that the galactic years that followed were the worst I had ever lived through. I went on looking, and signs kept growing thicker in space; from all the worlds anybody who had an opportunity invariably left his mark in space somehow; and our world, too, every time I turned, I found more crowded, so that world and space seemed the mirror of each other, both minutely adorned with hieroglyphics and ideograms, each of which might be a sign and might not be: a calcareous concretion on basalt, a crest raised by the wind on the clotted sand of the desert, the arrangement of the eyes in a peacock’s tail (gradually, living among signs had led us to see signs in countless things that, before, were there, marking nothing but their own presence; they had been transformed into the sign of themselves and had been added to the series of signs made on purpose by those who meant to make a sign), the fire-streaks against a wall of schistose rock, the four-hundred-and-twenty-seventh groove – slightly crooked – of the cornice of a tomb’s pediment, a sequence of streaks on a video during a thunderstorm (the series of signs was multiplied in the series of the signs of signs, of signs repeated countless times always the same and always somehow different because to the purposely made sign you had to add the sign that had happened there by chance), the badly inked tail of the letter R in an evening newspaper joined to a thready imperfection in the paper, one among the eight hundred thousand flakings of a tarred wall in the Melbourne docks, the curve of a graph, a skid-mark on the asphalt, a chromosome … Every now and then I’d start: that’s the one! And for a second I was sure I had rediscovered my sign, on the Earth or in space, it made no difference, because through the signs a continuity had been established with no precise boundaries any more.

In the universe now there was no longer a container and a thing contained, but only a general thickness of signs superimposed and coagulated, occupying the whole volume of space; it was constantly being dotted, minutely, a network of lines and scratches and reliefs and engravings; the universe was scrawled over on all sides, along all its dimensions. There was no longer any way to establish a point of reference: the galaxy went on turning but I could no longer count the revolutions, any point could be the point of departure, any sign heaped up with the others could be mine, but discovering it would have served no purpose, because it was clear that, independent of signs, space didn’t exist and perhaps had never existed.





All at One Point




Through the calculations begun by Edwin P. Hubble on the galaxies’ velocity of recession, we can establish the moment when all the universe’s matter was concentrated in a single point, before it began to expand in space.

Naturally, we were all there – old Qfwfq said – where else could we have been? Nobody knew then that there could be space. Or time either: what use did we have for time, packed in there like sardines?

I say ‘packed like sardines’, using a literary image: in reality there wasn’t even space to pack us into. Every point of each of us coincided with every point of each of the others in a single point, which was where we all were. In fact, we didn’t even bother one another, except for personality differences, because when space doesn’t exist, having somebody unpleasant like Mr Pbert Pberd underfoot all the time is the most irritating thing.

How many of us were there? Oh, I was never able to figure that out, not even approximately. To make a count, we would have had to move apart, at least a little, and instead we all occupied that same point. Contrary to what you might think, it wasn’t the sort of situation that encourages sociability; I know, for example, that in other periods neighbours called on one another; but there, because of the fact that we were all neighbours, nobody even said good morning or good evening to anybody else.

In the end each of us associated only with a limited number of acquaintances. The ones I remember most are Mrs Ph(i)Nko, her friend De XuaeauX, a family of immigrants by the name of Z’zu, and Mr Pbert Pberd, whom I just mentioned. There was also a cleaning woman – ‘maintenance staff ’ she was called – only one, for the whole universe, since there was so little room. To tell the truth, she had nothing to do all day long, not even dusting – inside one point not even a grain of dust can enter – so she spent all her time gossiping and complaining.

Just with the people I’ve already named we would have been overcrowded; but you have to add all the stuff we had to keep piled up in there: all the material that was to serve afterwards to form the universe, now dismantled and concentrated in such a way that you weren’t able to tell what was later to become part of astronomy (like the nebula of Andromeda) from what was assigned to geography (the Vosges, for example) or to chemistry (like certain beryllium isotopes). And on top of that, we were always bumping against the Z’zu family’s household goods: camp beds, mattresses, baskets; these Z’zus, if you weren’t careful, with the excuse that they were a large family, would begin to act as if they were the only ones in the world: they even wanted to hang lines across our point to dry their washing.

But the others also had wronged the Z’zus, to begin with, by calling them ‘immigrants’, on the pretext that, since the others had been there first, the Z’zus had come later. This was mere unfounded prejudice – that seems obvious to me – because neither before nor after existed, nor any place to immigrate from, but there were those who insisted that the concept of ‘immigrant’ could be understood in the abstract, outside of space and time.

It was what you might call a narrow-minded attitude, our outlook at that time, very petty. The fault of the environment in which we had been reared. An attitude that, basically, has remained in all of us, mind you: it keeps cropping up even today, if two of us happen to meet – at the bus stop, at the cinema, at an international dentists’ convention – and start reminiscing about the old days. We say hello – at times somebody recognizes me, at other times I recognize somebody – and we promptly start asking about this one and that one (even if each remembers only a few of those remembered by the others), and so we start in again on the old disputes, the slanders, the denigrations. Until somebody mentions Mrs Ph(i)Nko – every conversation finally gets around to her – and then, all of a sudden, the pettiness is put aside, and we feel uplifted, filled with a blissful, generous emotion. Mrs Ph(i)Nko, the only one that none of us has forgotten and that we all regret. Where has she ended up? I have long since stopped looking for her: Mrs Ph(i)Nko, her bosom, her thighs, her orange dressing gown – we’ll never meet her again, in this system of galaxies or in any other.

Let me make one thing clear: this theory that the universe, after having reached an extremity of rarefaction, will be condensed again has never convinced me. And yet many of us are counting only on that, continually making plans for the time when we’ll all be back there again. Last month, I went into the bar here on the corner and whom did I see? Mr Pbert Pberd. ‘What’s new with you? How do you happen to be in this neighbourhood?’ I learned that he’s the agent for a plastics firm, in Pavia. He’s the same as ever, with his silver tooth, his loud braces. ‘When we go back there,’ he said to me, in a whisper, ‘the thing we have to make sure of is, this time, certain people remain out … You know who I mean: those Z’zus …’

I would have liked to answer him by saying that I’ve heard a number of people make the same remark, concluding: ‘You know who I mean … Mr Pbert Pberd …’

To avoid the subject, I hastened to say: ‘What about Mrs Ph(i)Nko? Do you think we’ll find her back there again?’

‘Ah, yes … She, by all means …’ he said, turning purple.

For all of us the hope of returning to that point means, above all, the hope of being once more with Mrs Ph(i)Nko. (This applies even to me, though I don’t believe in it.) And in that bar, as always happens, we fell to talking about her, and were moved; even Mr Pbert Pberd’s unpleasantness faded, in the face of that memory.

Mrs Ph(i)Nko’s great secret is that she never aroused any jealousy among us. Or any gossip, either. The fact that she went to bed with her friend Mr De XuaeauX was well known. But in a point, if there’s a bed, it takes up the whole point, so it isn’t a question of going to bed, but of being there, because anybody in the point is also in the bed. Consequently, it was inevitable that she should be in bed also with each of us. If she had been another person, there’s no telling all the things that would have been said about her. It was the cleaning woman who always started the slander, and the others didn’t have to be coaxed to imitate her. On the subject of the Z’zu family – for a change! – the horrible things we had to hear: father, daughters, brothers, sisters, mother, aunts: nobody showed any hesitation even before the most sinister insinuation. But with her it was different: the happiness I derived from her was the joy of being concealed, punctiform, in her, and of protecting her, punctiform, in me; it was at the same time vicious contemplation (thanks to the promiscuity of the punctiform convergence of us all in her) and also chastity (given her punctiform impenetrability). In short: what more could I ask?

And all of this, which was true of me, was true also for each of the others. And for her: she contained and was contained with equal happiness, and she welcomed us and loved and inhabited all equally.

We got along so well all together, so well that something extraordinary was bound to happen. It was enough for her to say, at a certain moment: ‘Oh, if I only had some room, how I’d like to make some tagliatelle for you boys!’ And in that moment we all thought of the space that her round arms would occupy, moving backwards and forwards with the rolling pin over the dough, her bosom leaning over the great mound of flour and eggs which cluttered the wide board while her arms kneaded and kneaded, white and shiny with oil up to the elbows; we thought of the space that the flour would occupy, and the wheat for the flour, and the fields to raise the wheat, and the mountains from which the water would flow to irrigate the fields, and the grazing lands for the herds of calves that would give their meat for the sauce; of the space it would take for the Sun to arrive with its rays, to ripen the wheat; of the space for the Sun to condense from the clouds of stellar gases and burn; of the quantities of stars and galaxies and galactic masses in flight through space which would be needed to hold suspended every galaxy, every nebula, every sun, every planet, and at the same time we thought of it, this space was inevitably being formed, at the same time that Mrs Ph(i)Nko was uttering those words: ‘… ah, what tagliatelle, boys!’ the point that contained her and all of us was expanding in a halo of distance in light-years and light-centuries and billions of light-millennia, and we were being hurled to the four corners of the universe (Mr Pbert Pberd all the way to Pavia), and she, dissolved into I don’t know what kind of energy-light-heat, she, Mrs Ph(i)Nko, she who in the midst of our closed, petty world had been capable of a generous impulse, ‘Boys, the tagliatelle I would make for you!’, a true outburst of general love, initiating at the same moment the concept of space and, properly speaking, space itself, and time, and universal gravitation, and the gravitating universe, making possible billions and billions of suns, and of planets, and fields of wheat, and Mrs Ph(i)Nkos, scattered through the continents of the planets, kneading with floury, oil-shiny, generous arms, and she lost at that very moment, and we, mourning her loss.





Without Colours




Before forming its atmosphere and its oceans, the Earth must have resembled a grey ball revolving in space. As the Moon does now; where the ultraviolet rays radiated by the Sun arrive directly, all colours are destroyed, which is why the cliffs of the lunar surface, instead of being coloured like Earth’s, are of a dead, uniform grey. If the Earth displays a varicoloured countenance, it is thanks to the atmosphere, which filters that murderous light.

A bit monotonous – Qfwfq confirmed – but restful, all the same. I could go for miles and miles at top speed, the way you can move where there isn’t any air about, and all I could see was grey upon grey. No sharp contrasts: the only really white white, if there was any, lay in the centre of the Sun and you couldn’t even begin to approach it with your eyes; and as far as really black black is concerned, there wasn’t even the darkness of night, because all the stars were constantly visible. Uninterrupted horizons opened before me with mountain chains just beginning to emerge, grey mountains, above grey rocky plains; and though I crossed continent after continent I never came to a shore, because oceans and lakes and rivers were still lying underground somewhere or other.

You rarely met anyone in those days: there were so few of us! To survive with that ultraviolet you couldn’t be too demanding. Above all the lack of atmosphere asserted itself in many ways, you take meteors for example: they fell like hail from all the points of space, because then we didn’t have the stratosphere where nowadays they strike, as if on a roof, and disintegrate. Then there was the silence: no use shouting! Without any air to vibrate, we were all deaf and dumb. The temperature? There was nothing around to retain the Sun’s heat: when night fell it was so cold you could freeze stiff. Fortunately, the Earth’s crust warmed us from below, with all those molten minerals which were being compressed in the bowels of the planet. The nights were short (like the days: the Earth turned around faster); I slept huddled up to a very warm rock; the dry cold all around was pleasant. In other words, as far as the climate went, to tell you the truth, I wasn’t so badly off.

Among the countless indispensable things we had to do without, the absence of colours – as you can imagine – was the least of our problems; even if we had known they existed, we would have considered them an unsuitable luxury. The only drawback was the strain on your eyes when you had to hunt for something or someone, because with everything equally colourless no form could be clearly distinguished from what was behind it or around it. You could barely make out a moving object: a meteor fragment as it rolled, or the serpentine yawning of a seismic chasm, or a lapillus being ejected from a volcano.

That day I was running through a kind of amphitheatre of porous, spongy rocks, all pierced with arches beyond which other arches opened; a very uneven terrain where the absence of colour was streaked by distinguishable concave shadows. And among the pillars of these colourless arches I saw a kind of colourless flash running swiftly, disappearing, then reappearing further on: two flattened glows that appeared and disappeared abruptly; I still hadn’t realized what they were, but I was already in love and running, in pursuit of the eyes of Ayl.

I went into a sandy wasteland: I proceeded, sinking down among dunes which were always somehow different and yet almost the same. Depending on the point from which you looked at them, the crests of the dunes seemed the outlines of reclining bodies. There you could almost make out the form of an arm folded over a tender breast, with the palm open under a resting cheek; further on, a young foot with a slender big toe seemed to emerge. As I stopped to observe those possible analogies, a full minute went by before I realized that, before my eyes, I didn’t have a sandy ridge but the object of my pursuit.

She was lying, colourless, overcome with sleep, on the colourless sand. I sat down nearby. It was the season – as I know now – when the ultraviolet era was approaching its end on our planet; a way of life about to finish was displaying its supreme peak of beauty. Nothing so beautiful had ever run over the Earth, as the creature I had before my eyes.

Ayl opened her eyes. She saw me. At first I believe she couldn’t distinguish me – as had happened to me, with her – from the rest of that sandy world; then she seemed to recognize in me the unknown presence that had pursued her and she was frightened. But in the end she became aware of our common substance and there was a half-timid, half-smiling palpitation in the look she gave me, which caused me to emit a silent whimper of happiness.

I started conversing, all in gestures. ‘Sand. Not-sand,’ I said, first pointing to our surroundings, then to the two of us.

She nodded yes, she had understood.

‘Rock. Not-rock,’ I said, to continue that line of reasoning. It was a period in which we didn’t have many concepts at our disposal: to indicate what we two were, for example, what we had in common and what was different, was not an easy undertaking.

‘I. You-not-I,’ I tried to explain, with gestures.

She was irked.

‘Yes. You-like-me, but only so much,’ I corrected myself.

She was a bit reassured, but still suspicious.

‘I, you, together, run run,’ I tried to say.

She burst out laughing and ran off.

We ran along the crest of the volcanoes. In the noon greyness Ayl’s flying hair and the tongues of flame that rose from the craters were mingled in a wan, identical fluttering of wings.

‘Fire. Hair,’ I said to her. ‘Fire same hair.’

She seemed convinced.

‘Not beautiful?’ I asked.

‘Beautiful,’ she answered.

The Sun was already sinking into a whitish sunset. On a crag of opaque rocks, the rays, striking sidelong, made some of the rocks shine.

‘Stones there not same. Beautiful, eh?’ I said.

‘No,’ she answered, and looked away.

‘Stones there beautiful, eh?’ I insisted, pointing to the shiny grey of the stones.

‘No.’ She refused to look.

‘To you, I, stones there!’ I offered her.

‘No. Stones here!’ Ayl answered and grasped a handful of the opaque ones. But I had already run ahead.

I came back with the glistening stones I had collected, but I had to force her to take them.

‘Beautiful!’ I tried to persuade her.

‘No!’ she protested, but she looked at them; removed now from the Sun’s reflections, they were opaque like the other stones; and only then did she say: ‘Beautiful!’

Night fell, the first I had spent not embracing a rock, and perhaps for this reason it seemed cruelly shorter to me. The light tended at every moment to erase Ayl, to cast a doubt on her presence, but the darkness restored my certainty she was there.

The day returned, to paint the Earth with grey; and my gaze moved around and didn’t see her. I let out a mute cry: ‘Ayl! Why have you run off?’ But she was in front of me and was looking for me, too; she couldn’t see me and silently shouted: ‘Qfwfq! Where are you?’ Until our eyesight darkened, examining that sooty luminosity and recognizing the outline of an eyebrow, an elbow, a thigh.

Then I wanted to shower Ayl with presents, but nothing seemed to me worthy of her. I hunted for everything that was in some way detached from the uniform surface of the world, everything marked by a speckling, a stain. But I was soon forced to realize that Ayl and I had different tastes, if not downright opposite ones: I was seeking a new world beyond the pallid patina that imprisoned everything, I examined every sign, every crack (to tell the truth something was beginning to change: in certain points the colourlessness seemed shot through with variegated flashes); instead, Ayl was a happy inhabitant of the silence that reigns where all vibration is excluded; for her anything that looked likely to break the absolute visual neutrality was a harsh discord; beauty began for her only where the greyness had extinguished even the remotest desire to be anything other than grey.

How could we understand each other? Nothing in the world that lay before our eyes was sufficient to express what we felt for each other, but while I was in a fury to wrest unknown vibrations from things, she wanted to reduce everything to the colourless beyond of their ultimate substance.

A meteorite crossed the sky, its trajectory passing in front of the Sun; its fluid and fiery envelope for an instant acted as a filter to the Sun’s rays, and all of a sudden the world was immersed in a light never seen before. Purple chasms gaped at the foot of orange cliffs, and my violet hands pointed to the flaming green meteor while a thought for which words did not yet exist tried to burst from my throat:

‘This for you! From me this for you, yes, yes, beautiful!’

At the same time I wheeled around, eager to see the new way Ayl would surely shine in the general transfiguration; but I didn’t see her: as if in that sudden shattering of the colourless glaze, she had found a way to hide herself, to slip off among the crevices in the mosaic.

‘Ayl! Don’t be frightened, Ayl! Show yourself and look!’

But already the meteorite’s arc had moved away from the Sun, and the Earth was reconquered by its perennial grey, now even greyer to my dazzled eyes, and indistinct, and opaque, and there was no Ayl.

She had really disappeared. I sought her through a long throbbing of days and nights. It was the era when the world was testing the forms it was later to assume: it tested them with the material it had available, even if it wasn’t the most suitable, since it was understood that there was nothing definitive about the trials. Trees of smoke-coloured lava stretched out twisted branches from which hung thin leaves of slate. Butterflies of ash flying over clay meadows hovered above opaque crystal daisies. Ayl might be the colourless shadow swinging from a branch of the colourless forest or bending to pick grey mushrooms under grey clumps of bushes. A hundred times I thought I glimpsed her and a hundred times I thought I lost her again. From the wastelands I moved to the inhabited localities. At that time, sensing the changes that would take place, obscure builders were shaping premature images of a remote, possible future. I crossed a piled-up metropolis of stones; I went through a mountain pierced with passageways like an anchorite’s retreat; I reached a port that opened upon a sea of mud; I entered a garden where, from sandy beds, tall menhirs rose into the sky.

The grey stone of the menhirs was covered with a pattern of barely indicated grey veins. I stopped. In the centre of this park, Ayl was playing with her female companions. They were tossing a quartz ball into the air and catching it.

Someone threw it too hard, the ball came within my reach, and I caught it. The others scattered to look for it; when I saw Ayl alone, I threw the ball into the air and caught it again. Ayl ran over; hiding, I threw the quartz ball, drawing Ayl further and further away. Finally I showed myself; she scolded me, then laughed; and so we went on, playing, through strange regions.

At that time the strata of the planet were laboriously trying to establish an equilibrium through a series of earthquakes. Every now and then the ground was shaken by one, and between Ayl and me crevasses opened across which we threw the quartz ball back and forth. These chasms gave the elements compressed in the heart of the Earth an avenue of escape, and now we saw outcroppings of rock emerge, or fluid clouds, or boiling jets spurt up.

As I went on playing with Ayl, I noticed that a gassy layer had spread over the Earth’s crust, like a low fog slowly rising. A moment before it had reached our ankles, and now we were in it up to our knees, then to our hips … At that sight, a shadow of uncertainty and fear grew in Ayl’s eyes; I didn’t want to alarm her, and so, as if nothing were happening, I went on with our game; but I, too, was anxious.

It was something never seen before: an immense fluid bubble was swelling around the Earth and completely enfolding it; soon it would cover us from head to foot, and who could say what the consequences would be?

I threw the ball to Ayl beyond a crack opening in the ground, but my throw proved inexplicably shorter than I had intended and the ball fell into the gap; the ball must have become suddenly very heavy; no, it was the crack that had suddenly yawned enormously, and now Ayl was far away, beyond a liquid, wavy expanse that had opened between us and was foaming against the shore of rocks, and I leaned from this shore, shouting: ‘Ayl, Ayl!’ and my voice, its sound, the very sound of my voice spread loudly, as I had never imagined it, and the waves rumbled still louder than my voice. In other words: it was all beyond understanding.

I put my hands to my deafened ears, and at the same moment I also felt the need to cover my nose and mouth, so as not to breathe the heady blend of oxygen and nitrogen that surrounded me, but strongest of all was the impulse to cover my eyes, which seemed ready to explode.

The liquid mass spread out at my feet had suddenly turned a new colour, which blinded me, and I exploded in an articulate cry which, a little later, took on a specific meaning: ‘Ayl! The sea is blue!’

The great change so long awaited had finally taken place. On the Earth now there was air, and water. And over that newborn blue sea, the Sun – also coloured – was setting, an absolutely different and even more violent colour. So I was driven to go on with my senseless cries, like: ‘How red the Sun is, Ayl! Ayl! How red!’

Night fell. Even the darkness was different. I ran looking for Ayl, emitting cries without rhyme or reason, to express what I saw: ‘The stars are yellow, Ayl! Ayl!’

I didn’t find her that night or the days and nights that followed. All around, the world poured out colours, constantly new, pink clouds gathered in violet cumuli which unleashed gilded lightning; after the storms long rainbows announced hues that still hadn’t been seen, in all possible combinations. And chlorophyll was already beginning its progress: mosses and ferns grew green in the valleys where torrents ran. This was finally the setting worthy of Ayl’s beauty; but she wasn’t there! And without her all this varicoloured sumptuousness seemed useless to me, wasted.

I ran all over the Earth, I saw again the things I had once known grey, and I was still amazed at discovering fire was red, ice white, the sky pale blue, the earth brown, that rubies were ruby-coloured, and topazes the colour of topaz, and emeralds emerald. And Ayl? With all my imagination I couldn’t picture how she would appear to my eyes.

I found the menhir garden, now green with trees and grasses. In murmuring pools red and blue and yellow fish were swimming. Ayl’s friends were still leaping over the lawn, tossing the iridescent ball: but how changed they were! One was blonde with white skin, one brunette with olive skin, one brown-haired with pink skin, one had red hair and was dotted with countless, enchanting freckles.

‘Ayl!’ I cried. ‘Where is she? Where is Ayl? What does she look like? Why isn’t she with you?’

Her friends’ lips were red, their teeth white, and their tongues and gums were pink. Pink, too, were the tips of their breasts. Their eyes were aquamarine blue, cherry-black, hazel and maroon.

‘Why … Ayl …’ they answered. ‘She’s gone … we don’t know …’ and they went back to their game.

I tried to imagine Ayl’s hair and her skin, in every possible colour, but I couldn’t picture her; and so, as I looked for her, I explored the surface of the globe.

‘If she’s not up here,’ I thought, ‘that means she must be below,’ and at the first earthquake that came along, I flung myself into a chasm, down down into the bowels of the Earth.

‘Ayl! Ayl!’ I called in the darkness. ‘Ayl, come see how beautiful it is outside!’

Hoarse, I fell silent. And at that moment Ayl’s voice, soft, calm, answered me. ‘Sssh. I’m here. Why are you shouting so much? What do you want?’

I couldn’t see a thing. ‘Ayl! Come outside with me. If you only knew … Outside …’

‘I don’t like it, outside …’

‘But you, before …’

‘Before was before. Now it’s different. All that confusion has come.’

I lied. ‘No, no. It was just a passing change of light. Like that time with the meteorite! It’s over now. Everything is the way it used to be. Come, don’t be afraid …’ If she comes out, I thought, after the first moment of bewilderment, she’ll become used to the colours, she’ll be happy, and she’ll understand that I lied for her own good.

‘Really?’

‘Why should I tell you stories? Come, let me take you outside.’

‘No, you go ahead. I’ll follow you.’

‘But I’m impatient to see you again.’

‘You’ll see me only the way I like. Go ahead and don’t turn around.’

The telluric shocks cleared the way for us. The strata of rock opened fanwise and we advanced through the gaps. I heard Ayl’s light footsteps behind me. One more quake and we were outside. I ran along steps of basalt and granite which turned like the pages of a book: already, at the end, the breach that would lead us into the open air was tearing wide, already the Earth’s crust was appearing beyond the gap, sunny and green, already the light was forcing its way towards us. There: now I would see the colours brighten also on Ayl’s face … I turned to look at her.

I heard her scream as she drew back towards the darkness, my eyes still dazzled by the earlier light could make out nothing, then the rumble of the earthquake drowned everything, and a wall of rock suddenly rose, vertically, separating us.

‘Ayl! Where are you? Try to come over to this side, quickly, before the rock settles!’ And I ran along the wall looking for an opening, but the smooth, grey surface was compact, without a fissure.

An enormous chain of mountains had formed at that point. As I had been projected outwards, into the open, Ayl had remained beyond the rock wall, closed in the bowels of the Earth.

‘Ayl! Where are you? Why aren’t you out here?’ and I looked around at the landscape that stretched away from my feet. Then, all of a sudden, those pea-green lawns where the first scarlet poppies were flowering, those canary-yellow fields which striped the tawny hills sloping down to a sea full of azure glints, all seemed so trivial to me, so banal, so false, so much in contrast with Ayl’s person, with Ayl’s world, with Ayl’s idea of beauty, that I realized her place could never have been out here. And I realized, with grief and fear, that I had remained out here, that I would never again be able to escape those gilded and silvered gleams, those little clouds that turned from pale blue to pink, those green leaves that yellowed every autumn, and that Ayl’s perfect world was lost for ever, so lost I couldn’t even imagine it any more, and nothing was left that could remind me of it, even remotely, nothing except perhaps that cold wall of grey stone.





Games Without End




When the galaxies become more remote, the rarefaction of the universe is compensated for by the formation of further galaxies composed of newly created matter. To maintain a stable median density of the universe it is sufficient to create a hydrogen atom every two hundred and fifty million years for forty cubic centimetres of expanding space. (This steady-state theory, as it is known, has been opposed to the other hypothesis, that the universe was born at a precise moment as the result of a gigantic explosion.)

I was only a child, but I was already aware of it – Qfwfq narrated – I was acquainted with all the hydrogen atoms, one by one, and when a new atom cropped up, I noticed it right away. When I was a kid, the only playthings we had in the whole universe were the hydrogen atoms, and we played with them all the time, I and another youngster my age whose name was Pfwfp.

What sort of games? That’s simple enough to explain. Since space was curved, we sent the atoms rolling along its curve, like so many marbles, and the kid whose atom went furthest won the game. When you made your shot you had to be careful, to calculate the effects, the trajectories, you had to know how to exploit the magnetic fields and the fields of gravity, otherwise the ball left the track and was eliminated from the contest.

The rules were the usual thing: with one atom you could hit another of your atoms and send it further ahead, or else you could knock your opponent’s atom out of the way. Of course, we were careful not to throw them too hard, because when two hydrogen atoms are knocked together, click! a deuterium atom might be formed, or even a helium atom, and for the purposes of the game, such atoms were out: what’s more, if one of the two belonged to your opponent, you had to give him an atom of your own to pay him back.

You know how the curve of space is shaped: a little ball would go spinning along and then one fine moment it would start off down the slope and you couldn’t catch it. So, as we went on playing, the number of atoms in the game kept getting smaller, and the first to run out of atoms was the loser.

Then, right at the crucial moment, these new atoms started cropping up. Obviously, there’s quite a difference between a new atom and a used one: the new atoms were shiny, bright, fresh, and moist, as if with dew. We made new rules: one new was worth three old; and the new ones, as they were formed, were to be shared between us, fifty-fifty.

In this way our game never ended, and it never became boring either, because every time we found new atoms it seemed as if the game were new as well, as if we were playing it for the first time.

Then, what with one thing and another, as the days went by, the game grew less exciting. There were no more new atoms to be seen: the ones we lost couldn’t be replaced, our shots became weak, hesitant, because we were afraid to lose the few pieces still in the game, in that barren, even space.

Pfwfp was changed, too: he became absent-minded, wandered off and couldn’t be found when it was his turn to shoot; I would call him, but there was never an answer, and then he would turn up half an hour later.

‘Go on, it’s your turn. Aren’t you in the game any more?’

‘Of course I’m in the game. Don’t rush me. I’m going to shoot now.’

‘Well, if you keep going off by yourself, we might as well stop playing!’

‘Hmph! You’re only making all this fuss because you’re losing.’

This was true: I hadn’t any atoms left, whereas Pfwfp, somehow or other, always had one in reserve. If some new atoms didn’t turn up for us to share, I hadn’t a hope of getting even with him.

The next time Pfwfp went off, I followed him, on tiptoe. As long as I was present, he seemed to be strolling about aimlessly, whistling: but once he was out of my sight he started trotting through space, intent, like somebody who has a definite purpose in mind. And what this purpose of his was – this treachery, as you shall see – I soon discovered: Pfwfp knew all the places where new atoms were formed and every now and then he would take a little walk, to collect them on the spot the minute they were dished up, then he would hide them. This was why he was never short of atoms to play with!

But before putting them in the game, incorrigible cheat that he was, he set about disguising them as old atoms, rubbing the film of the electrons until it was worn and dull, to make me believe this was an old atom he had had all along and had just happened to find in his pocket.

And that wasn’t the whole story: I made a quick calculation of the atoms played and I realized they were only a small part of those he had stolen and hid. Was he piling up a store of hydrogen? What was he going to do with it? What did he have in mind? I suddenly had a suspicion: Pfwfp wanted to build a universe of his own, a brand-new universe.

From that moment on, I couldn’t rest easy: I had to get even with him. I could have followed his example: now that I knew the places, I could have gone there a little ahead of him and grabbed the new atoms the moment they were born, before he could get his hands on them! But that would have been too simple. I wanted to catch him in a trap worthy of his own perfidy. First of all, I started making fake atoms: while he was occupied with his treacherous raids, I was in a secret storeroom of mine, pounding and mixing and kneading all the material I had at my disposal. To tell you the truth, this material didn’t amount to much: photoelectric radiations, scrapings from magnetic fields, a few neutrons collected in the road; but by rolling it into balls and wetting it with saliva, I managed to make it stick together. In other words, I prepared some little corpuscles that, on close inspection, were obviously not made of hydrogen or any other identifiable element, but for somebody in a hurry, like Pfwfp, who rushed past and stuck them furtively into his pocket, they looked like real hydrogen, and spanking new.

So while he still didn’t suspect a thing, I preceded him in his rounds. I had made a careful mental note of all the places.

Space is curved everywhere, but in some places it’s more curved than in others: like pockets or bottlenecks or niches, where the void is crumpled up. These niches are where, every two hundred and fifty million years, there is a slight tinkling sound and a shiny hydrogen atom is formed like a pearl between the valves of an oyster. I walked past, pocketed the atom, and set the fake atom in its place. Pfwfp didn’t notice a thing: predatory, greedy, he filled his pockets with that rubbish, as I was accumulating all the treasures that the universe cherished in its bosom.

The fortunes of our games underwent a change: I always had new atoms to shoot, while Pfwfp’s regularly misfired. Three times he tried a roll and three times the atom crumbled to bits as if crushed in space. Now Pfwfp found one excuse after another, trying to call off the game.

‘Go on,’ I insisted, ‘if you don’t shoot, the game’s mine.’

And he said: ‘It doesn’t count. When an atom is ruined the game’s null and void, and you start over again.’ This was a rule he had invented at that very moment.

I didn’t give him any peace, I danced around him, leaped on his back, and chanted:



‘Throw it throw it throw it

If not, you lose, you know it.

For every turn that you don’t take

An extra throw for me to make.’





‘That’s enough of that,’ Pfwfp said, ‘let’s change games.’

‘Aha!’ I said. ‘Why don’t we play at flying galaxies?’

‘Galaxies?’ Pfwfp suddenly brightened with pleasure. ‘Suits me. But you … you don’t have a galaxy!’

‘Yes, I do.’

‘So do I.’

‘Come on! Let’s see who can send his highest!’

And I took all the new atoms I was hiding and flung them into space. At first they seemed to scatter, then they thickened together into a kind of light cloud, and the cloud swelled and swelled, and inside it some incandescent condensations were formed, and they whirled and whirled and at a certain point became a spiral of constellations never seen before, a spiral that poised, opening in a gust, then sped away as I held on to its tail and ran after it. But now I wasn’t the one who made the galaxy fly, it was the galaxy that was lifting me aloft, clinging to its tail; I mean, there wasn’t any height or depth now but only space, widening, and the galaxy in its midst, also opening wide, and me hanging there, making faces at Pfwfp, who was already thousands of light-years away.

Pfwfp, at my first move, had promptly dug out all his hoard, hurling it with a balanced movement as if he expected to see the coils of an endless galaxy open in the sky. But instead, nothing happened. There was a sizzling sound of radiations, a messy flash, then everything died out at once.

‘Is that the best you can do?’ I shouted at Pfwfp, who was yelling curses at me, green with rage:

‘I’ll show you, Qfwfq, you pig!’

But in the meanwhile my galaxy and I were flying among thousands of other galaxies, and mine was the newest, the envy of the whole firmament, blazing as it was with young hydrogen and the youngest carbon and newborn beryllium. The old galaxies fled us, filled with jealousy, and we, prancing and haughty, avoided them, so antiquated and ponderous to look at. As that reciprocal flight developed, we sailed across spaces that became more and more rarefied and empty: and then I saw something appear in the midst of the void, like uncertain bursts of light. These were new galaxies, formed by matter just born, galaxies even newer than mine. Soon space became filled again, and dense, like a vineyard just before vintage time, and we flew on, escaping from one another, my galaxy fleeing the younger ones as it had the older, and young and old fleeing us. And we advanced to fly through empty skies, and these skies also became peopled, and so on and on.

In one of these propagations, I heard: ‘Qfwfq, you’ll pay for this now, you traitor!’ and I saw a brand-new galaxy flying on our trail, and there leaning forward from the very tip of the spiral, yelling threats and insults at me, was my old playmate Pfwfp.

The chase began. Where space rose, Pfwfp’s galaxy, young and agile, gained ground, but on the descents, my heavier galaxy plunged ahead again.

In any kind of race there’s a secret: it’s all in how you take the curves. Pfwfp’s galaxy tended to narrow them, mine to swing out. And as it kept broadening the curves, we were finally flung beyond the edge of space, with Pfwfp after us. We kept up the pursuit, using the system one always uses in such circumstances, that is, creating space before us as we went forward.

So there I was, with nothingness in front of me, and that nasty-faced Pfwfp after me: an unpleasant sight either way. In any case, I preferred to look ahead, and what did I see? Pfwfp, whom my eyes had just left behind me, was speeding on his galaxy directly in front of me. ‘Ah!’ I cried, ‘now it’s my turn to chase you!’

‘What?’ Pfwfp said, from before me or behind me, I’m not really sure which, ‘I’m the one who’s chasing you!’

I turned around: there was Pfwfp, still at my heels. I looked ahead again: and he was there, racing off with his back turned to me. But as I looked more closely, I saw that in front of this galaxy of his that was preceding me there was another, and that other galaxy was mine, because there I was on it, unmistakable even though seen from behind. And I turned towards the Pfwfp following me and narrowed my eyes: I saw that his galaxy was being chased by another, mine, with me on top of it, turning at that same time to look back.

And so after every Qfwfq there was a Pfwfp, and after every Pfwfp a Qfwfq, and every Pfwfp was chasing a Qfwfq, who was pursuing him and vice versa. Our distances grew a bit shorter or a bit longer, but now it was clear that one would never overtake the other, nor the other overtake one. We had lost all pleasure in this game of chase, and we weren’t children any more for that matter, but now there was nothing else we could do.





The Aquatic Uncle




The first vertebrates who, in the Carboniferous period, abandoned aquatic life for terrestrial descended from the osseous, pulmonate fish whose fins were capable of rotation beneath their bodies and thus could be used as paws on the Earth.

By then it was clear that the water period was coming to an end – old Qfwfq recalled – those who decided to make the great move were growing more and more numerous, there wasn’t a family that didn’t have some loved one up on dry land, and everybody told fabulous tales of the things that could be done there, and they called back to their relatives to join them. There was no holding the young fish; they slapped their fins on the muddy banks to see if they would work as paws, as the more talented ones had already discovered. But just at that time the differences among us were becoming accentuated: there might be a family that had been living on land, say, for several generations, whose young people acted in a way that wasn’t even amphibious but almost reptilian already; and there were others who lingered, still living like fish, those who, in fact, became even more fishy than they had been before.

Our family, I must say, including grandparents, was all up on the shore, padding about as if we had never known how to do anything else. If it hadn’t been for the obstinacy of our great-uncle N’ba N’ga, we would have long since lost all contact with the aquatic world.

Yes, we had a great-uncle who was a fish, on my paternal grandmother’s side, to be precise, of the Coelacanthus family of the Devonian period (the fresh-water branch: who are, for that matter, cousins of the others – but I don’t want to go into all these questions of kinship, nobody can ever follow them anyhow). So as I was saying, this great-uncle lived in certain muddy shallows, among the roots of some proto-conifers, in that inlet of the lagoon where all our ancestors had been born. He never stirred from there: at any season of the year all we had to do was push ourselves over the softer layers of vegetation until we could feel ourselves sinking into the dampness, and there below, a few palms’ lengths from the edge, we could see the column of little bubbles he sent up, breathing heavily the way old folk do, or the little cloud of mud scraped up by his sharp snout, always rummaging around, more out of habit than out of the need to hunt for anything.

‘Uncle N’ba N’ga! We’ve come to pay you a visit! Were you expecting us?’ we would shout, slapping our paws and tails in the water to attract his attention. ‘We’ve brought you some insects that grow where we live! Uncle N’ba N’ga! Have you ever seen such fat cockroaches? Taste one and see if you like it …’

‘You can clean those revolting warts you’ve got with your stinking cockroaches!’ Our great-uncle’s answer was always some remark of this sort, or perhaps even ruder: this is how he welcomed us every time, but we paid no attention because we knew he would mellow after a little while, accept our presents gladly, and converse in politer tones.

‘What do you mean, Uncle? Warts? When did you ever see any warts on us?’

This business about warts was a widespread prejudice among the old fish: a notion that, from living on dry land, we would develop warts all over our bodies, exuding liquid matter: this was true enough for the toads, but we had nothing in common with them; on the contrary, our skin, smooth and slippery, was such as no fish had ever had; and our great-uncle knew this perfectly well, but he still couldn’t stop larding his talk with all the slanders and intolerance he had grown up in the midst of.

We went to visit our great-uncle once a year, the whole family together. It also gave us an opportunity to have a reunion, since we were scattered all over the continent; we could exchange bits of news, trade edible insects, and discuss old questions that were still unsettled.

Our great-uncle spoke his mind even on questions that were removed from him by miles and miles of dry land, such as the division of territory for dragonfly hunting; and he would side with this one or that one, according to his own reasoning, which was always aquatic. ‘But don’t you know that it’s always better to hunt on the bottom and not on the water’s surface? So what are you getting all upset over?’

‘But, Uncle, you see: it isn’t a question of hunting on the bottom or on the surface. I live at the foot of a hill, and he lives halfway up the slope … You know what I mean by hill, Uncle …’

And he said: ‘You always find the best crayfish at the foot of the cliffs.’ It just wasn’t possible to make him accept a reality different from his own.

And yet, his opinions continued to exert an authority over all of us; in the end we asked his advice about matters he didn’t begin to understand, though we knew he could be dead wrong. Perhaps his authority stemmed from the fact that he was a leftover from the past, from his way of using old figures of speech, like: ‘Lower your fins there, youngster!’, whose meaning we didn’t grasp very clearly.

We had made various attempts to get him up on land with us, and we went on making them; indeed, on this score, the rivalry among the various branches of the family never died out, because whoever managed to take our great-uncle home with him would achieve a position of pre-eminence over the rest of our relatives. But the rivalry was pointless, because our uncle wouldn’t dream of leaving the lagoon.

‘Uncle, if you only knew how sorry we feel leaving you all alone, at your age, in the midst of all that dampness … We’ve had a wonderful idea …’ someone would begin.

‘I was expecting the lot of you to catch on finally,’ the old fish interrupted, ‘now you’ve got over the whim of scraping around in that drought, so it’s time you came back to live like normal beings. Here there’s plenty of water for all, and when it comes to food, there’s never been a better season for worms. You can all dive right in, and we won’t have to discuss it any further.’

‘No, no, Uncle N’ba N’ga, you’ve got it all wrong. We wanted to take you to live with us, in a lovely little meadow … You’ll be nice and snug; we’ll dig you a little damp hole. You’ll be able to turn and toss in it, just like here. And you might even try taking a few steps around the place: you’ll be very good at it, just wait and see. And besides, at your time of life, the climate on land is much more suitable. So come now, Uncle N’ba N’ga, don’t wait to be coaxed. Won’t you come home with us?’

‘No!’ was our great-uncle’s sharp reply, and taking a nosedive into the water, he vanished from our sight.

‘But why, Uncle? What have you got against the idea? We simply don’t understand. Anyone as broad-minded as you ought to be above certain prejudices …’

From an angry huff of water at the surface, before the final plunge with a still-agile jerk of his tail fin, came our uncle’s final answer: ‘He who has fleas in his scales swims with his belly in the mud!’, which must have been an idiomatic expression (similar to our own, much more concise proverb: ‘If you itch, scratch’), with that term ‘mud’ which he insisted on using where we would say ‘land’.

That was about the time when I fell in love. Lll and I spent our days together, chasing each other; no one as quick as she had ever been seen before; in the ferns, which were as tall as trees in those days, she would climb to the top in one burst, and the tops would bend almost to the ground, then she would jump down and run off again; I, with slower and somewhat clumsier movements, followed her. We ventured into zones of the interior where no print had ever marked the dry and crusty terrain; at times I stopped, frightened at having come so far from the expanse of the lagoons. But nothing seemed so far from aquatic life as she, Lll, did: the deserts of sand and stones, the prairies, the thick forests, the rocky hillocks, the quartz mountains: this was her world, a world that seemed made especially to be scanned by her oblong eyes, to be trod by her darting steps. When you looked at her smooth skin, you felt that scales had never existed.

Her relatives made me a bit ill at ease; hers was one of those families who had become established on Earth in the earliest period and had finally become convinced they had never lived anywhere else, one of those families who, by now, even laid their eggs on dry terrain, protected by a hard shell, and Lll, if you looked at her when she jumped, at her flashing movements, you could tell she had been born the way she was now, from one of those eggs warmed by sand and sun, having completely skipped the swimming, wriggling phase of the tadpole, which was still obligatory in our less evolved families.

The time had come for Lll to meet my family: and since its oldest and most authoritative member was Great-Uncle N’ba N’ga, I couldn’t avoid a visit to him, to introduce my fiancée. But every time an opportunity occurred, I postponed it, out of embarrassment; knowing the prejudices among which she had been brought up, I hadn’t yet dared tell Lll that my great-uncle was a fish.

One day we had wandered off to one of those damp promontories that girdle the lagoon, where the ground is made not so much of sand as of tangled roots and rotting vegetation. And Lll came out with one of her usual dares, her challenges to feats: ‘Qfwfq, how long can you keep your balance? Let’s see who can run closest to the edge here!’ And she darted forward with her Earth-creature’s leap, now slightly hesitant, however.

This time I not only felt I could follow her, but also that I could win, because my paws got a better grip on damp surfaces. ‘As close to the edge as you like!’ I cried. ‘And even beyond it!’

‘Don’t talk nonsense!’ she said. ‘How can you run beyond the edge? It’s all water there!’

Perhaps this was the opportune moment to bring up the subject of my great-uncle. ‘What of that?’ I said to her. ‘There are those who run on this side of the edge, and those who run on the other.’

‘You’re saying things that make no sense at all!’

‘I’m saying that my great-uncle N’ba N’ga lives in the water the way we live on the land, and he’s never come out of it!’

‘Ha! I’d like to meet this N’ba N’ga of yours!’

She had no sooner finished saying this than the muddied surface of the lagoon gurgled with bubbles, moved in a little eddy, and allowed a nose, all covered with spiky scales, to appear.

‘Well, here I am. What’s the trouble?’ Great-Uncle said, staring at Lll with eyes as round and inexpressive as stones, flapping the gills at either side of his enormous throat. Never before had my great-uncle seemed so different from the rest of us: a real monster.

‘Uncle, if you don’t mind … this is … I mean, I have the pleasure to present to you my future bride, Lll,’ and I pointed to my fiancée, who for some unknown reason had stood erect on her hind paws, in one of her most exotic poses, certainly the least likely to be appreciated by that boorish old relative.

‘And so, young lady, you’ve come to wet your tail a bit, eh?’ my great-uncle said: a remark that in his day no doubt had been considered courtly, but to us sounded downright indecent.

I looked at Lll, convinced I would see her turn and run off with a shocked twitter. But I hadn’t considered how strong her training was, her habit of ignoring all vulgarity in the world around her. ‘Tell me something: those little plants there …’ she said, nonchalantly, pointing to some rushes growing tall in the midst of the lagoon, ‘where do they put down their roots?’

One of those questions you ask just to make conversation: as if she cared about those rushes! But it seemed Uncle had been waiting only for that moment to start explaining the why and the wherefore of the roots of floating trees and how you could swim among them and, indeed, how they were the very best places for hunting.

I thought he would never stop. I huffed impatiently, I tried to interrupt him. But what did that saucy Lll do? She encouraged him! ‘Oh, so you go hunting among those underwater roots? How interesting!’

I could have sunk into the ground from shame.

And he said: ‘I’m not fooling! The worms you find there! You can fill your belly, all right!’ And without giving it a second thought, he dived. An agile dive such as I’d never seen him make before. Or rather, he made a leap into the air – his whole length out of the water, all dotted with scales – spreading the spiky fans of his fins; then, when he had completed a fine half-circle in the air, he plunged back, head-first, and disappeared quickly with a kind of screw-motion of his crescent-shaped tail.

At this sight, I recalled the little speech I had prepared hastily to apologize to Lll, taking advantage of my uncle’s departure (‘You really have to understand him, you know, this mania for living like a fish has finally even made him look like a fish’), but the words died in my throat. Not even I had ever realized the full extent of my grandmother’s brother’s fishiness. So I just said: ‘It’s late, Lll, let’s go …’ and already my great-uncle was re-emerging, holding in his shark’s lips a garland of worms and muddy seaweed.

It seemed too good to be true, when we finally took our leave; but as I trotted along silently behind Lll, I was thinking that now she would begin to make her comments, that the worst was still to come. But then Lll, without stopping, turned slightly towards me: ‘He’s very nice, your uncle,’ and that was all she said. More than once in the past her irony had disarmed me; but the icy sensation that filled me at this remark was so awful that I would rather not have seen her any more than to have to face the subject again.

Instead, we went on seeing each other, going together, and the lagoon episode was never mentioned. I was still uneasy: it was no use my trying to persuade myself she had forgotten; every now and then I suspected she was remaining silent in order to embarrass me later in some spectacular way, in front of her family, or else – and, for me, this was an even worse hypothesis – she was making an effort to talk about other things only because she felt sorry for me. Then, out of a clear sky, one morning she said curtly: ‘See here, aren’t you going to take me to visit your uncle any more?’

In a faint voice I asked: ‘Are you joking?’

Not at all; she was in earnest, she couldn’t wait to go back and have a little chat with old N’ba N’ga. I was all mixed up.

That time our visit to the lagoon lasted longer. We lay on a sloping bank, all three of us: my great-uncle was nearest the water, but the two of us were half in and half out, too, so anyone seeing us from the distance, all close together, wouldn’t have known who was terrestrial and who was aquatic.

The fish started in with one of his usual tirades: the superiority of water respiration to air breathing, and all his repertory of denigration. ‘Now Lll will jump up and give him what for!’ I thought. Instead, that day Lll was apparently using a different tactic: she argued seriously, defending our point of view, but as if she were also taking old N’ba N’ga’s notions into consideration.

According to my great-uncle, the lands that had emerged were a limited phenomenon: they were going to disappear just as they had cropped up or, in any event, they would be subject to constant changes: volcanoes, glaciations, earthquakes, upheavals, changes of climate and of vegetation. And our life in the midst of all this would have to face constant transformations, in the course of which whole races would disappear, and the only survivors would be those who were prepared to change the bases of their existence so radically that the reasons why living was beautiful would be completely overwhelmed and forgotten.

This prospect was in absolute contradiction to the optimism in which we children of the coast had been brought up, and I opposed the idea with shocked protests. But for me the true, living confutation of those arguments was Lll: in her I saw the perfect, definitive form, born from the conquest of the land that had emerged; she was the sum of the new boundless possibilities that had opened. How could my great-uncle try to deny the incarnate reality of Lll? I was aflame with polemical passion, and I thought that my fiancée was being all too patient and too understanding with our opponent.

True, even for me – used as I was to hearing only grumblings and abuse from my great-uncle’s mouth – this logically arranged argumentation of his came as a novelty, though it was still spiced with antiquated and bombastic expressions and was made comical by his peculiar accent. It was also amazing to hear him display a detailed familiarity – though entirely external – with the continental lands.

But Lll, with her questions, tried to make him talk as much as possible about life underwater: and, to be sure, this was the theme that elicited the most tightly knit, even emotional discourse from my great-uncle. Compared to the uncertainties of earth and air, lagoons and seas and oceans represented a future with security. Down there, changes would be very few, space and provender were unlimited, the temperature would always be steady; in short, life would be maintained as it had gone on till then, in its achieved, perfect forms, without metamorphoses or additions with dubious outcome, and every individual would be able to develop his own nature, to arrive at the essence of himself and of all things. My great-uncle spoke of the aquatic future without embellishments or illusions, he didn’t conceal the problems, even serious ones, that would arise (most worrying of all, the increase of saline content); but they were problems that wouldn’t upset the values and the proportions in which he believed.

‘But now we gallop over valleys and mountains, Uncle!’ I cried, speaking for myself but especially for Lll, who remained silent.

‘Go on with you, tadpole, when you’re wet again, you’ll be back home!’ he apostrophized, to me, resuming the tone I had always heard him use with us.

‘Don’t you think, Uncle, that if we wanted to learn to breathe underwater, it would be too late?’ Lll asked earnestly, and I didn’t know whether to feel flattered because she had called my old relative uncle or confused because certain questions (at least, so I was accustomed to think) shouldn’t even be asked.

‘If you’re game, sweetie,’ the fish said, ‘I can teach you in a minute!’

Lll came out with an odd laugh, then finally began to run away, to run on and on beyond all pursuit.

I hunted for her across plains and hills, I reached the top of a basalt spur which dominated the surrounding landscape of deserts and forests surrounded by the waters. Lll was there. What she had wanted to tell me – I had understood her! – by listening to N’ba N’ga and then by fleeing and taking refuge up here was surely this: we had to live in our world thoroughly, as the old fish lived in his.

‘I’ll live here, the way Uncle does down there,’ I shouted, stammering a bit; then I corrected myself: ‘The two of us will live here, together!’ because it was true that without her I didn’t feel secure.

But what did Lll answer me then? I blush when I remember it even now, after all these geological eras. She answered: ‘Get along with you, tadpole; it takes more than that!’ And I didn’t know whether she was imitating my great-uncle, to mock him and me at once, or whether she had really assumed the old nut’s attitude towards his nephew, and either hypothesis was equally discouraging, because both meant she considered me at a halfway stage, a creature not at home in the one world or in the other.

Had I lost her? Suspecting this, I hastened to woo her back. I took to performing all sorts of feats: hunting flying insects, leaping, digging underground dens, wrestling with the strongest of our group. I was proud of myself, but unfortunately whenever I did something brave, she wasn’t there to see me: she kept disappearing, and no one knew where she had gone off to hide.

Finally I understood: she went to the lagoon, where my great-uncle was teaching her to swim underwater. I saw them surface together: they were moving along at the same speed, like brother and sister.

‘You know?’ she said, gaily, ‘my paws work beautifully as fins!’

‘Good for you! That’s a big step forward,’ I couldn’t help remarking, sarcastically.

It was a game, for her: I understood. But a game I didn’t like. I had to recall her to reality, to the future that was awaiting her.

One day I waited for her in the midst of a wood of tall ferns which sloped to the water.

‘Lll, I have to talk to you,’ I said as soon as I saw her, ‘you’ve been amusing yourself long enough. We have more important things ahead of us. I’ve discovered a passage in the mountains: beyond it stretches an immense stone plain, just abandoned by the water. We’ll be the first to settle there, we’ll populate unknown lands, you and I, and our children.’

‘The sea is immense,’ Lll said.

‘Stop repeating that old fool’s nonsense. The world belongs to those with legs, not to fish, and you know it.’

‘I know that he’s somebody who is somebody,’ Lll said.

‘And what about me?’

‘There’s nobody with legs who is like him.’

‘And your family?’

‘We’ve quarrelled. They don’t understand anything.’

‘Why, you’re crazy! Nobody can turn back!’

‘I can.’

‘And what do you think you’ll do, all alone with an old fish?’

‘Marry him. Be a fish again with him. And bring still more fish into the world. Goodbye.’

And with one of those rapid climbs of hers, the last, she reached the top of a fern frond, bent it towards the lagoon, and let go in a dive. She surfaced, but she wasn’t alone: the sturdy, curved tail of Great-Uncle N’ba N’ga rose near hers and, together, they cleft the waters.

It was a hard blow for me. But, after all, what could I do about it? I went on my way, in the midst of the world’s transformations, being transformed myself. Every now and then, among the many forms of living beings, I encountered one who ‘was somebody’ more than I was: one who announced the future, the duck-billed platypus who nurses its young, just hatched from the egg; or I might encounter another who bore witness to a past beyond all return, a dinosaur who had survived into the beginning of the Cenozoic, or else – a crocodile – part of the past that had discovered a way to remain immobile through the centuries. They all had something, I know, that made them somehow superior to me, sublime, something that made me, compared to them, mediocre. And yet I wouldn’t have traded places with any of them.





How Much Shall We Bet?




The logic of cybernetics, applied to the history of the universe, is in the process of demonstrating how the galaxies, the solar system, the Earth, cellular life could not help but be born. According to cybernetics, the universe is formed by a series of feedbacks, positive and negative, at first through the force of gravity that concentrates masses of hydrogen in the primitive cloud, then through nuclear force and centrifugal force which are balanced with the first. From the moment that the process is set in motion, it can only follow the logic of this chain.

Yes, but at the beginning nobody knew it – Qfwfq explained – I mean, you could foretell it perhaps, but instinctively, by ear, guessing. I don’t want to boast, but from the start I was willing to bet that there was going to be a universe, and I hit the nail on the head; on the question of its nature, too, I won plenty of bets, with old Dean (k)yK.

When we started betting there wasn’t anything yet that might lead you to foresee anything, except for a few particles spinning around, some electrons scattered here and there at random, and protons all more or less on their own. I started feeling a bit strange, as if there was going to be a change of weather (in fact, it had grown slightly cold), and so I said: ‘You want to bet we’re heading for atoms today?’

And Dean (k)yK said: ‘Oh, cut it out. Atoms! Nothing of the sort, and I’ll bet anything you say.’

So I said: ‘Would you even bet ix?’

The Dean answered: ‘Ix raised to the power n!’

He had no sooner finished saying this than around each proton its electron started whirling and buzzing. An enormous hydrogen cloud was condensing in space. ‘You see? Full of atoms!’

‘Oh, if you call that stuff atoms!’ (k)yK said; he had the bad habit of putting up an argument, instead of admitting he had lost a bet.

We were always betting, the Dean and I, because there was really nothing else to do, and also because the only proof I existed was that I bet with him, and the only proof he existed was that he bet with me. We bet on what events would or would not take place; the choice was virtually unlimited, because up till then absolutely nothing had happened. But since there wasn’t even a way to imagine how an event might be, we designated it in a kind of code: Event A, Event B, Event C, and so on, just to distinguish one from the other. What I mean is: since there were no alphabets in existence then or any other series of accepted signs, first we bet on how a series of signs might be and then we matched these possible signs with various possible events, in order to identify with sufficient precision matters that we still didn’t know a thing about.

We also didn’t know what we were staking because there was nothing that could serve as a stake, and so we gambled on our word, keeping an account of the bets each had won, to be added up later. All these calculations were very difficult, since numbers didn’t exist then, and we didn’t even have the concept of number, to begin to count, because it wasn’t possible to separate anything from anything else.

This situation began to change when, in the protogalaxies, the protostars started condensing, and I quickly realized where it would all end, with that temperature rising all the time, and so I said: ‘Now they’re going to catch fire.’

‘Nuts!’ the Dean said.

‘Want to bet?’ I said.

‘Anything you like,’ he said, and wham, the darkness was shattered by all these incandescent balls that began to swell out.

‘Oh, but that isn’t what catching fire means …’ (k)yK began, quibbling about words in his usual way.

By that time I had developed a system of my own, to shut him up: ‘Oh, no? And what does it mean then, in your opinion?’

He kept quiet: lacking imagination as he did, when a word began to have one meaning, he couldn’t conceive of its having any other.

Dean (k)yK, if you had to spend much time with him, was a fairly boring sort, without any resources, he never had anything to tell. Not that I, on the other hand, could have told much, since events worth telling about had never happened, or at least so it appeared to us. The only thing was to frame hypotheses, or rather: hypothesize on the possibility of framing hypotheses. Now, when it came to framing hypotheses of hypotheses, I had much more imagination than the Dean, and this was both an advantage and a disadvantage, because it led me to make riskier bets, so that you might say our probabilities of winning were even.

As a rule, I bet on the possibility of a certain event’s taking place, whereas the Dean almost always bet against it. He had a static sense of reality, old (k)yK, if I may express myself in these terms, since between static and dynamic at that time there wasn’t the difference there is nowadays, or in any case you had to be very careful in grasping it, that difference.

For example, the stars began to swell, and I said: ‘How much?’ I tried to lead our predictions into the field of numbers, where he would have less to argue about.

At that time there were only two numbers: the number e and the number pi. The Dean did some figuring, by and large, and answered: ‘They’ll grow to e raised to pi.’

Trying to act smart! Any fool could have told that much. But matters weren’t so simple, as I had realized. ‘You want to bet they stop, at a certain point?’

‘All right. When are they going to stop?’

And with my usual bravado, I came out with my pi. He swallowed it. The Dean was dumbfounded.

From that moment on we began to bet on the basis of e and of pi.

‘Pi!’ the Dean shouted, in the midst of the darkness and the scattered flashes. But instead that was the time it was e.

We did it all for fun, obviously; because there was nothing in it for us, as far as earning went. When the elements began to be formed, we started evaluating our bets in atoms of the rarer elements, and this is where I made a mistake. I had seen that the rarest of all was technetium, so I started betting technetium and winning, and hoarding: I built up a capital of technetium. I hadn’t foreseen it was an unstable element that dissolved in radiations: suddenly I had to start all over again, from zero.

Naturally, I made some wrong bets, too, but then I got ahead again and I could allow myself a few risky prognostications.

‘Now a bismuth isotope is going to come out!’ I said hastily, watching the newborn elements crackle forth from the crucible of a ‘supernova’ star. ‘Let’s bet!’

Nothing of the sort: it was a polonium atom, in mint condition.

In these cases (k)yK would snigger and chuckle as if his victories were something to be proud of, whereas he simply benefited from overbold moves on my part. Conversely, the more I went ahead, the better I understood the mechanism, and in the face of every new phenomenon, after a few rather groping bets, I could calculate my previsions rationally. The order that made one galaxy move at precisely so many million light-years from another, no more and no less, became clear to me before he caught on. After a while it was all so easy I didn’t enjoy it any more.

And so, from the data I had at my disposal, I tried mentally to deduce other data, and from them still others, until I succeeded in suggesting eventualities that had no apparent connection with what we were arguing about. And I just let them fall, casually, into our conversation.

For example, we were making predictions about the curve of the galactic spirals, and all of a sudden I came out with: ‘Now listen a minute, (k)yK, what do you think? Will the Assyrians invade Mesopotamia?’

He laughed, confused. ‘Meso- what? When?’

I calculated quickly and blurted a date, not in years and centuries of course, because then the units of measuring time weren’t conceivable in lengths of that sort, and to indicate a precise date we had to rely on formulae so complicated it would have taken a whole blackboard to write them down.

‘How can you tell?’

‘Come on, (k)yK, are they going to invade or not? I say they do; you say no. All right? Don’t take so long about it.’

We were still in the boundless void, striped here and there by a streak or two of hydrogen around the vortexes of the first constellations. I admit it required very complicated deductions to foresee the Mesopotamian plains black with men and horses and arrows and trumpets, but, since I had nothing else to do, I could bring it off.

Instead, in such cases, the Dean always bet no, not because he believed the Assyrians wouldn’t do it, but simply because he refused to think there would ever be Assyrians and Mesopotamia and the Earth and the human race.

These bets, obviously, were long-term affairs, more than the others; not like some cases, where the result was immediately known. ‘You see that Sun over there, the one being formed with an ellipsoid all around it? Quick, before the planets are formed: how far will the orbits be from one another?’

The words were hardly out of my mouth when, in the space of eight or nine – what am I saying? – six or seven hundred million years, the planets started revolving each in its orbit, not a whit more narrow nor a whit wider.

I got much more satisfaction, however, from the bets we had to bear in mind for billions and billions of years, without forgetting what we had bet on, and remembering the shorter-term bets at the same time, and the number (the era of whole numbers had begun, and this complicated matters a bit) of bets each of us had won, the sum of the stakes (my advantage kept growing; the Dean was up to his ears in debt). And in addition to all this I had to dream up new bets, further and further ahead in the chain of my deductions.

‘On 8 February 1926, at Santhià, in the Province of Vercelli – got that? At number 18 in Via Garibaldi – you follow me? Signorina Giuseppina Pensotti, aged twenty-two, leaves her home at quarter to six in the afternoon: does she turn right or left?’

‘Mmmmm …’ (k)yK said.

‘Come on, quickly. I say she turns right …’ And through the dust nebulae, furrowed by the orbits of the constellations, I could already see the wispy evening mist rise in the streets of Santhià, the faint light of a street lamp barely outlining the pavement in the snow, illuminating for a moment the slim shadow of Giuseppina Pensotti as she turned the corner past the Customs House and disappeared.

On the subject of what was to happen among the celestial bodies, I could stop making new bets and wait calmly to pocket my winnings from (k)yK as my predictions gradually came true. But my passion for gambling led me, from every possible event, to foresee the interminable series of events that followed, even down to the most marginal and aleatory ones. I began to combine predictions of the most immediately and easily calculated events with others that required extremely complicated operations. ‘Hurry, look at the way the planets are condensing: now tell me, which is the one where an atmosphere is going to be formed? Mercury? Venus? Earth? Mars? Come on: make up your mind! And while you’re about it, calculate for me the index of demographic increase on the Indian subcontinent during the British raj. What are you puzzling over? Make it snappy!’

I had started along a narrow channel beyond which events were piling up with multiplied density; I had only to seize them by the handful and throw them in the face of my competitor, who had never guessed at their existence. Once I happened to drop, almost absently, the question: ‘Arsenal–Real Madrid, semifinals. Arsenal playing at home. Who wins?’ and in a moment I realized that with what seemed a casual jumble of words I had hit on an infinite reserve of new combinations among the signs which compact, opaque, uniform reality would use to disguise its monotony, and I realized that perhaps the race towards the future, the race I had been the first to foresee and desire, tended only – through time and space – towards a crumbling into alternatives like this, until it would dissolve in a geometry of invisible triangles and ricochets like the course of a football among the white lines of a field as I tried to imagine them, drawn at the bottom of the luminous vortex of the planetary system, deciphering the numbers marked on the chests and backs of the players at night, unrecognizable in the distance.

By now I had plunged into this new area of possibility, gambling everything I had won before. Who could stop me? The Dean’s customary bewildered incredulity only spurred me to greater risks. When I saw I was caught in a trap it was too late. I still had the satisfaction – a meagre satisfaction, this time – of being the first to be aware of it: (k)yK seemed not to catch on to the fact that luck had now come over to his side, but I counted his bursts of laughter, once rare and now becoming more and more frequent …

‘Qfwfq, have you noticed that Pharaoh Amenhotep IV had no male issue? I’ve won!’

‘Qfwfq, look at Pompey! He lost out to Caesar after all! I told you so!’

And yet I had worked out my calculations to their conclusion, I hadn’t overlooked a single component. Even if I were to go back to the beginning, I would bet the same way as before.

‘Qfwfq, under the Emperor Justinian, it was the silkworm that was imported from China to Constantinople. Not gunpowder … Or am I getting things mixed up?’

‘No, no, you win, you win …’

To be sure, I had let myself go, making predictions about fleeting, impalpable events, countless predictions, and now I couldn’t draw back, I couldn’t correct myself. Besides, correct myself how? On the basis of what?

‘You see, Balzac doesn’t make Lucien de Rubempré commit suicide at the end of Les Illusions perdues,’ the Dean said, in a triumphant, squeaky little voice he had been developing of late. ‘He has him saved by Carlos Herrera, alias Vautrin. You know? The character who was also in Père Goriot … Now then, Qfwfq, how far have we got?’

My advantage was dropping. I had saved my winnings, converted into hard currency, in a Swiss bank, but I had constantly to withdraw big sums to meet my losses. Not that I lost every time. I still won a bet now and then, even a big one, but the roles had been reversed; when I won I could no longer be sure it wasn’t an accident or that, the next time, my calculations wouldn’t again be proved wrong.

At the point we had reached, we needed reference libraries, subscriptions to specialized magazines, as well as a complex of electronic computers for our calculations: everything, as you know, was furnished us by a Research Foundation, to which, when we settled on this planet, we appealed for funds to finance our research. Naturally, our bets figure as an innocent game between the two of us and nobody suspects the huge sums involved in them. Officially we live on our modest salaries as researchers for the Electronic Predictions Centre, with the added sum, for (k)yK, that goes with the position of Dean, which he intrigued to obtain from the Department, though he kept on pretending he wasn’t lifting a finger. (His predilection for stasis has got steadily worse; he turned up here in the guise of a paralytic, in a wheelchair.) This title of Dean, I might add, has nothing to do with seniority, otherwise I’d be just as much entitled to it as he is, though of course it doesn’t mean anything to me.

So this is how we reached our present situation. Dean (k)yK, from the porch of his building, seated in the wheelchair, his legs covered with a rug of newspapers from all over the world, which arrive with the morning post, shouts so loud you can hear him all the way across the campus: ‘Qfwfq, the atomic treaty between Turkey and Japan wasn’t signed today; they haven’t even begun talks. You see? Qfwfq, that man in Termini Imerese who killed his wife was given three years, just as I said. Not life!’

And he waves the pages of the papers, black and white the way space was when the galaxies were being formed, and crammed – as space was then – with isolated corpuscles, surrounded by emptiness, containing no destination or meaning. And I think how beautiful it was then, through that void, to draw lines and parabolas, pick out the precise point, the intersection between space and time where the event would spring forth, undeniable in the prominence of its glow; whereas now events come flowing down without interruption, like cement being poured, one column next to the other, one within the other, separated by black and incongruous headlines, legible in many ways but intrinsically illegible, a doughy mass of events without form or direction, which surrounds, submerges, crushes all reasoning.

‘You know something, Qfwfq? The closing quotations on Wall Street are down 2 per cent, not 6! And that building constructed illegally on the Via Cassia is twelve storeys high, not nine! Nearco IV wins at Longchamps by two lengths. What’s our score now, Qfwfq?’





The Dinosaurs




The causes of the rapid extinction of the Dinosaur remain mysterious; the species had evolved and grown throughout the Triassic and the Jurassic, and for 150 million years the Dinosaur had been the undisputed master of the continents. Perhaps the species was unable to adapt to the great changes of climate and vegetation which took place in the Cretaceous period. By its end all the Dinosaurs were dead.

All except me – Qfwfq corrected – because, for a certain period, I was also a Dinosaur: about fifty million years, I’d say, and I don’t regret it; if you were a Dinosaur in those days, you were sure you were in the right, and you made everyone look up to you.

Then the situation changed – I don’t have to tell you all the details – and all sorts of trouble began, defeats, errors, doubts, treachery, pestilences. A new population was growing up on the Earth, hostile to us. They attacked us on all sides; there was no dealing with them. Now there are those who say the pleasure of decadence, the desire to be destroyed were part of the spirit of us Dinosaurs even before then. I don’t know: I never felt like that; if some of the others did, it was because they sensed they were already finished.

I prefer not to think back to the period of the great death. I never believed I’d escape it. The long migration that saved me led me through a cemetery of fleshless carcasses, where only a crest or a horn or a scale of armour or a fragment of horny skin recalled the ancient splendour of the living creature. And over those remains worked the beaks, the bills, the talons, the suckers of the new masters of the planet. When at last I found no further traces, of the living or of the dead, then I stopped.

I spent many, many years on those deserted plateaux. I had survived ambushes, epidemics, starvation, frost: but I was alone. To go on staying up there for ever was impossible for me. I started the journey down.

The world had changed: I couldn’t recognize the mountains any more, or the rivers, or the trees. The first time I glimpsed some living beings, I hid: it was a flock of the New Ones, small specimens, but strong.

‘Hey, you!’ They had spied me, and I was immediately amazed at this familiar way of addressing me. I ran off; they chased me. For millennia I had been used to striking terror all around me, and to feeling terror of the others’ reactions to the terror I aroused. None of that now. ‘Hey, you!’ They came over to me casually, neither hostile nor frightened.

‘Why are you running? What’s come over you?’ They only wanted me to show them the shortest path to I don’t know where. I stammered out that I was a stranger there. ‘What made you run off?’ one of them said. ‘You looked as if you’d seen … a Dinosaur!’ And the others laughed. But in that laughter I sensed for the first time a hint of apprehension. Their good humour was a bit forced. Then one of them turned serious and added: ‘Don’t say that even as a joke. You don’t know what they are …’

So, the terror of the Dinosaurs still continued in the New Ones, but perhaps they hadn’t seen any for several generations and weren’t able to recognize one. I travelled on, cautious but also impatient to repeat the experiment. At a spring a New One, a young female, was drinking; she was alone. I went up softly, stretched my neck to drink beside her; I could already imagine her desperate scream the moment she saw me, her breathless flight. She would spread the alarm, and the New Ones would come out in force to hunt me down … For a moment I repented my action; if I wanted to save myself, I should tear her limb from limb at once: start it all over again …

She turned and said: ‘Nice and cool, isn’t it?’ She went on conversing amiably, the usual remarks one makes to strangers, asking me if I came from far away, if I had run into rain on the trip, or if it had been sunny. I would never have imagined it possible to talk like that with non-Dinosaurs, and I was tense and mostly silent.

‘I always come here to drink,’ she said, ‘to the Dinosaur

I reacted with a start, my eyes widening.

‘Oh, yes, that’s what we call it. The Dinosaur’s Spring … that’s been its name since ancient times. They say that a Dinosaur hid here, one of the last, and whenever anybody came here for a drink the Dinosaur jumped on him and tore him limb from limb. My goodness!’

I wanted to drop through the earth. ‘Now she’ll realize who I am,’ I was thinking, ‘now she’ll take a better look at me and recognize me!’ And as one does, when one doesn’t want to be observed, I kept my eyes lowered and coiled my tail, as if to hide it. It was such a strain that when, still smiling, she said goodbye and went on her way, I felt as tired as if I’d fought a battle, one of those battles we fought when we were defending ourselves with our claws and our teeth. I realized I hadn’t even said goodbye back to her.

I reached the shore of a river, where the New Ones had their dens and fished for their living. To create a bend in the river, where the water would be less rapid and would hold the fish, they were constructing a dam of branches. As soon as they saw me, they glanced up from their work and stopped. They looked at me, then at each other, in silence, as if questioning one another. ‘This is it,’ I thought, ‘all I can do is sell my life dearly.’ And I prepared to leap to my defence.

Luckily, I stopped myself in time. Those fishermen had nothing against me: seeing how strong I was, they wanted to ask me if I could stay with them and work transporting wood.

‘This is a safe place,’ they insisted, when I seemed to hesitate. ‘There hasn’t been a Dinosaur seen here since the days of our grandfathers’ grandfathers …’

Nobody suspected who I might be. I stayed. The climate was good, the food wasn’t to my taste but it was all right, and the work wasn’t too hard for one of my strength. They gave me a nickname: ‘The Ugly One’, because I was different from them, for no other reason. These New Ones, I don’t know how in the world you call them, Pantotheres or whatever, were still a rather formless species; in fact, all the other species descended from it later; and already in those days there was the greatest variety of similarities and dissimilarities from one individual to the next, so, though I was an entirely different type, I was finally convinced I didn’t stand out too much.

Not that I ever became completely used to this idea: I always felt like a Dinosaur in the midst of enemies, and every evening, when they started telling stories of the Dinosaurs, legends handed down from generation to generation, I hung back in the shadow, my nerves on edge.

The stories were terrifying. The listeners, pale, occasionally bursting out with cries of fear, hung on the lips of the storyteller, whose voice also betrayed an equally profound emotion. Soon it was clear to me that all of them already knew those stories (even though the repertory was very plentiful), but when they heard them, their fear was renewed every time. The Dinosaurs were portrayed as so many monsters, described with a wealth of detail that would never have helped anyone recognize them, and depicted as intent only on harming the New Ones, as if the New Ones from the very beginning had been the Earth’s most important inhabitants and we had had nothing better to do than run after them from morning till night. For myself, when I thought about us Dinosaurs, I returned in memory to a long series of hardships, death agonies, mourning; the stories that the New Ones told about us were so remote from my experience that they should have left me indifferent, as if they referred to outsiders, strangers. And yet, as I listened, I realized I had never thought about how we appeared to others, and that, among all the nonsense, those tales, here and there, from the narrators’ point of view, had hit on the truth. In my mind their stories of terrors we inflicted became confused with my memories of terror undergone: the more I learned how we had made others tremble, the more I trembled myself.

Each one told a story, in turn, and at a certain point they said: ‘What does the Ugly One have to tell us? Don’t you have any stories? Didn’t anyone in your family have adventures with the Dinosaurs?’

‘Yes, but …’ I stammered, ‘it was so long ago … ah, if you only knew …’

The one who came to my assistance at that juncture was Fern-flower, the young creature of the spring. ‘Oh, leave him alone … He’s a foreigner, he doesn’t feel at home yet; he can’t speak our language well enough …’

In the end they changed the subject. I could breathe again.

A kind of friendliness had grown up between Fern-flower and me. Nothing too intimate: I had never dared touch her. But we had long talks. Or rather, she told me all sorts of things about her life; in my fear of giving myself away, of making her suspect my identity, I stuck always to generalities. Fern-flower told me her dreams: ‘Last night I saw this enormous Dinosaur, terrifying, breathing smoke from his nostrils. He came closer, grabbed me by the nape, and carried me off. He wanted to eat me alive. It was a terrible dream, simply terrible, but – isn’t this odd? – I wasn’t the least frightened. No, I don’t know how to say it … I liked him …’

That dream should have made me understand many things and especially one thing: that Fern-flower desired nothing more than to be assaulted. This was the moment for me to embrace her. But the Dinosaur they imagined was too different from the Dinosaur I was, and this thought made me even more different and timid. In other words, I missed a good opportunity. Then Fern-flower’s brother returned from the season of fishing in the plains, the young one was much more closely watched, and our conversations became less frequent.

This brother, Zahn, started acting suspicious the moment he first saw me. ‘Who’s that? Where does he come from?’ he asked the others, pointing to me.

‘That’s the Ugly One, a foreigner, who works with the timber,’ they said to him. ‘Why? What’s strange about him?’

‘I’d like to ask him that,’ Zahn said, with a grim look. ‘Hey, you! What’s strange about you?’ What could I answer? ‘Me? Nothing.’

‘So, you’re not strange, eh?’ and he laughed. That time it went no further, but I was prepared for the worst.

This Zahn was one of the most active ones in the village. He had travelled about the world and seemed to know many more things than the others. When he heard the usual talk about the Dinosaurs, he was seized by a kind of impatience. ‘Fairy tales,’ he said once, ‘you’re all telling fairy tales. I’d like to see you if a real Dinosaur turned up here.’

‘There haven’t been any for a long time now …’ a fisherman said.

‘Not all that long …’ Zahn sniggered. ‘And there might still be a herd or two around the countryside … In the plains, our bunch takes turns keeping watch, day and night. But there we can trust one another; we don’t take in characters we don’t know …’ And he gave me a long, meaningful look.

There was no point dragging things out: better force him into the open right away. I took a step forward. ‘Have you got something against me?’ I asked.

‘I’m against anybody when we don’t know who gave him birth or where he came from, and when he wants to eat our food and court our sisters …’

One of the fishermen took up my defence: ‘The Ugly One earns his keep; he’s a hard worker …’

‘He’s capable of carrying tree-trunks on his back, I won’t deny that,’ Zahn went on, ‘but if danger came, if we had to defend ourselves with claws and teeth, how can we be sure he would behave properly?’

A general argument began. The strange thing was that the possibility of my being a Dinosaur never occurred to anyone; the sin I was accused of was being Different, a Foreigner, and therefore Untrustworthy; and the argument was over how much my presence increased the danger of the Dinosaurs’ ever coming back.

‘I’d like to see him in battle, with that little lizard’s mouth of his …’ Zahn went on contemptuously, goading me.

I went over to him, abruptly, nose to nose. ‘You can see me right now, if you don’t run away.’

He wasn’t expecting that. He looked around. The others formed a circle. There was nothing for us to do but fight.

I moved forward, brushed off his bite by twisting my neck; I had already given him a blow of my paw that knocked him on his back, and I was on top of him. This was a wrong move; as if I didn’t know it, as if I had never seen Dinosaurs die, clawed and bitten on the chest and the belly, when they believed they had pinned down their enemy. But I still knew how to use my tail, to steady myself; I didn’t want to let him turn me over; I put on pressure, but I felt I was about to give way …

Then one of the observers yelled: ‘Give it to him, Dinosaur!’ No sooner had they unmasked me than I became again the Dinosaur of the old days: since all was lost, I might as well make them feel their ancient terror. And I struck Zahn once, twice, three times …

They tore us apart. ‘Zahn, we told you! The Ugly One has muscles. You don’t try any tricks with him, not with old Ugly!’ And they laughed and congratulated me, slapping me on the back with their paws. Convinced I had been discovered, I couldn’t get my bearings; it was only later that I understood the cry ‘Dinosaur’ was a habit of theirs, to encourage the rivals in a fight, as if to say: ‘Go on, you’re the stronger one!’ and I wasn’t even sure whether they had shouted the word at me or at Zahn.

From that day on I was the most respected of all. Even Zahn encouraged me, followed me around to see me give new proofs of my strength. I must say that their usual talk about the Dinosaurs changed a bit, too, as always happens when you tire of judging things in the same old way and fashion begins to take a new turn. Now, if they wanted to criticize something in the village, they had got into the habit of saying that, among Dinosaurs, certain things were never done, that the Dinosaurs in many ways could offer an example, that the behaviour of the Dinosaurs in this or that situation (in their private life, for example) was beyond reproach, and so on. In short, there seemed to be emerging a kind of posthumous admiration for these Dinosaurs about whom no one knew anything precise.

Sometimes I couldn’t help saying: ‘Come, let’s not exaggerate. What do you think a Dinosaur was, after all?’

They interrupted me: ‘Shut up. What do you know about them? You’ve never seen one.’

Perhaps this was the right moment to start calling a spade a spade. ‘I too have seen them!’ I cried, ‘and if you want, I can explain to you what they were like!’

They didn’t believe me; they thought I was making fun of them. For me, this new way they had of talking about the Dinosaurs was almost as unbearable as the old one. Because – apart from the grief I felt at the sad fate that had befallen my species – I knew the life of the Dinosaurs from within, I knew how we had been governed by narrow-mindedness, prejudice, unable to adapt ourselves to new situations. And I now had to see them take as a model that little world of ours, so backward and so – to tell the truth – boring! I had to feel imposed on me, and by them, a kind of sacred respect for my species which I myself had never felt! But, after all, this was only right: what did these New Ones have that was so different from the Dinosaurs of the good old days? Safe in their village with their dams and their ponds, they had also taken on a smugness, a presumptuousness … I finally felt towards them the same intolerance I had had towards my own environment, and the more I heard them admiring the Dinosaurs the more I detested Dinosaurs and New Ones alike.

‘You know something? Last night I dreamed that a Dinosaur was to go past my house,’ Fern-flower said to me, ‘a magnificent Dinosaur, a Prince or a King of Dinosaurs. I made myself pretty, I put a ribbon on my head, and I leaned out of the window. I tried to attract the Dinosaur’s attention, I bowed to him, but he didn’t even seem to notice me, didn’t even deign to glance at me …’

This dream furnished me with a new key to the understanding of Fern-flower’s attitude towards me: the young creature had mistaken my shyness for disdainful pride. Now, when I recall it, I realize that all I had to do was maintain that attitude a little longer, make a show of haughty detachment, and I would have won her completely. Instead, the revelation so moved me that I threw myself at her feet, tears in my eyes, and said: ‘No, no, Fern-flower, it’s not the way you think; you’re better than any Dinosaur, a hundred times better, and I feel so inferior to you …’

Fern-flower stiffened, took a step backwards. ‘What are you saying?’ This wasn’t what she expected: she was upset, and she found the scene a bit distasteful. I understood this too late; I hastily recovered myself, but a feeling of uneasiness now weighed heavily between us.

There was no time to ponder it, what with everything that happened a little later. Breathless messengers reached the village. ‘The Dinosaurs are coming back!’ A herd of strange monsters had been sighted, speeding fiercely over the plain. At this rate they would attack the village the following morning. The alarm was sounded.

You can imagine the flood of conflicting emotions that filled my breast at this news: my species wasn’t extinct, I would be able to join my brothers, take up my old life! But the memory of the old life that returned to my mind was the endless series of defeats, of flights, of dangers; to begin again meant perhaps only a temporary extension of that death agony, the return to a phase I thought had already ended. Now, here in the village, I had achieved a kind of new tranquillity, and I was sorry to lose it.

The New Ones were also torn by conflicting feelings. On the one hand, there was panic; on the other, the wish to triumph over the ancient enemy; and at the same time, there was the conviction that if the Dinosaurs had survived and were now advancing vengefully it meant nobody could stop them and their victory, pitiless as it might be, could also perhaps be a good thing for all. It was as if the New Ones wanted at the same time to defend themselves, to flee, to wipe out the enemy, and to be defeated; and this uncertainty was reflected in the disorder of their defence preparations.

‘Just a moment!’ Zahn shouted. ‘There is only one among us who is capable of taking command! The strongest of all, the Ugly One!’

‘You’re right! The Ugly One must command us!’ the others shouted in chorus. ‘Yes, yes, full power to the Ugly One!’ And they placed themselves at my command.

‘No, no, how can I, a foreigner? … I’m not up to it …’ I parried. But it was impossible to convince them.

What was I to do? That night I couldn’t close my eyes. The call of my blood insisted I should desert and join my brothers; loyalty towards the New Ones, who had welcomed and sheltered me and given me their trust, demanded I should consider myself on their side; and in addition I knew full well that neither Dinosaurs nor New Ones were worthy of my lifting a finger for them. If the Dinosaurs were trying to re-establish their rule with invasions and massacres, it meant they had learned nothing from experience, that they had survived only by mistake. And it was clear that the New Ones, turning the command over to me, had found the easiest solution: leave all responsibility to an outsider, who could be their saviour but also, in case of defeat, a scapegoat to hand over to the enemy to pacify him, or else a traitor who, putting them into the enemies’ hands, could bring about their unconfessable dream of being mastered by the Dinosaurs. In short, I wanted nothing to do with either side: let them rip each other apart in turn! I didn’t give a damn about any of them. I had to escape as fast as possible, let them stew in their own juice, have nothing more to do with these old stories.

That same night, slipping away in the darkness, I left the village. My first impulse was to get as far as possible from the battlefield, return to my secret refuges; but curiosity got the better of me: I had to see my counterparts, to know who would win. I hid on the top of some cliffs that overhung the bend of the river, and I waited for dawn.

As the light broke, some figures appeared on the horizon. They charged forward. Even before I could distinguish them clearly, I could dismiss the notion that Dinosaurs could ever run so gracelessly. When I recognized them I didn’t know whether to laugh or to blush with shame. Rhinoceroses, a herd, the first ones, big and clumsy and crude, studded with horny bumps, but basically inoffensive, devoted only to cropping grass: this is what the others had mistaken for the ancient Lords of the Earth!

The rhinoceros herd galloped with the sound of thunder, stopped to lick some bushes, then ran on towards the horizon without even noticing the waiting squads of fishermen.

I ran back to the village. ‘You got it all wrong! They weren’t Dinosaurs!’ I announced. ‘Rhinoceroses, that’s what they were! They’ve already gone. There isn’t any more danger!’ And I added, to justify my vanishing in the night: ‘I went out scouting. To spy on them and report back.’

‘We may not have understood they weren’t Dinosaurs,’ Zahn said calmly, ‘but we have understood that you are no hero,’ and he turned his back on me.

To be sure, they were all disappointed: about the Dinosaurs, about me. Now the stories of Dinosaurs became jokes, in which the terrible monsters played ridiculous roles. I no longer was affected by their petty wit. Now I recognized the greatness of spirit that had made us choose to disappear rather than live in a world no longer suited to us. If I survived it was only so that one of us could continue to feel himself a Dinosaur in the midst of these wretches who tried to conceal, with stupid teasing, the fear that still dominated them. And what choice did the New Ones have, beyond the choice between mockery and fear?

Fern-flower betrayed a new attitude when she narrated a dream to me: ‘There was this Dinosaur, very funny, all green; and everybody was teasing him and pulling his tail. Then I stepped forward and protected him; I took him away and petted him. And I realized that, ridiculous as he was, he was the saddest of all creatures and a river of tears flowed from his red and yellow eyes.’

What came over me, at those words? A revulsion, a refusal to identify myself with the images of that dream, the rejection of a sentiment that seemed to have become pity, an intolerance of the diminished idea they had all conceived of the Dinosaurian dignity? I had a burst of pride; I stiffened and hurled a few contemptuous phrases in her face: ‘Why do you bore me with these dreams of yours? They get more childish every time! You can’t dream anything but sentimental nonsense!’

Fern-flower burst into tears. I went off, shrugging my shoulders.

This happened on the dam; we weren’t alone; the fishermen hadn’t heard our dialogue but they had noticed my angry reaction and the young creature’s tears.

Zahn felt called upon to intervene. ‘Who do you think you are?’ he said, in a harsh voice. ‘How dare you insult my sister?’

I stopped, but didn’t answer. If he wanted to fight, I was ready. But the mood of the village had changed in recent times: they made a joke of everything. From the group of fishermen a falsetto cry was heard: ‘Come off it, get along with you, Dinosaur!’ This, as I well knew, was a mocking expression which had now come into use, as if to say: ‘Don’t exaggerate, don’t get carried away,’ and so on. But something stirred in my blood.

‘Yes, I am one, if you care to know,’ I shouted, ‘a Dinosaur! That’s what I am! Since you never have seen any Dinosaurs, here, take a look at me!’

General snickering broke out.

‘I saw one yesterday,’ an old fisherman said, ‘he came out of the snow.’ Silence immediately fell all around him.

The old fellow was just back from a journey in the mountains. The thaw had melted an ancient glacier and a Dinosaur’s skeleton had come to light.

The news spread through the village. ‘Let’s go and see the Dinosaur!’ They all ran up the mountain, and I went with them.

When we had passed a moraine of stones, uprooted trunks, mud, and dead birds, we saw a deep, shell-shaped valley. A veil of early lichens was turning the rocks green, now that they were freed from the ice. In the midst, lying as if asleep, his neck stretched by the widened intervals of the vertebrae, his tail sown in a long serpentine, a giant Dinosaur’s skeleton was lying. The chest cavity was arched like a sail, and when the wind struck the flat slabs of the ribs an invisible heart seemed to be beating within them still. The skull was turned in an anguished position, mouth open as if in a last cry.

The New Ones ran down there, shouting gaily; facing the skull, they felt the empty eye sockets staring at them; they kept a few paces’ distance, silently; then they turned and resumed their silly festiveness. If one of them had looked from the skeleton to me, as I stood there staring at it, he would have realized at once that we were identical. But nobody did this. Those bones, those claws, those murderous limbs spoke a language now become illegible; they no longer said anything to anyone, except that vague name which had remained unconnected with the experiences of the present.

I continued looking at the skeleton, the Father, the Brother, my Counterpart, my Self; I recognized my fleshless limbs, my lineaments carved in the stone, everything we had been and were no longer, our majesty, our faults, our ruin.

Now these remains would be used by the planet’s new, heedless occupants to mark a spot in the landscape, they would follow the destiny of the name ‘Dinosaur’, becoming an opaque sound without meaning. I must not allow it. Everything that concerned the true nature of the Dinosaurs must remain hidden. In the night, as the New Ones slept around the skeleton, which they had decked with flags, I transported it, vertebra by vertebra, and buried my Dead.

In the morning the New Ones found not a trace of the skeleton. They didn’t worry about it very long. It was another mystery added to the many mysteries concerning the Dinosaurs. They soon dismissed it from their thoughts.

But the appearance of the skeleton left its mark, for in all of them the idea of the Dinosaurs became bound to the idea of a sad end, and in the stories they now told the predominant tone was one of commiseration, of grief at our sufferings. I had no use for this pity of theirs. Pity for what? If ever a species had had a rich, full evolution, a long and happy reign, that species was ours. Our extinction had been a grandiose epilogue, worthy of our past. What could those fools understand of it? Every time I heard them become sentimental about the poor Dinosaurs I felt like making fun of them, telling invented, incredible stories. In any case, the real truth about the Dinosaurs would never be understood by anyone now; it was a secret I would keep for myself alone.

A band of vagabonds stopped at the village. Among them was a young female. When I saw her, I started with surprise. Unless my eyes were deceiving me, she didn’t have only the blood of the New Ones in her veins: she was a Half-breed, a Dinosaur Half-breed. Was she aware of it? No, certainly not, judging by her nonchalance. Perhaps it hadn’t been one of her parents but one of her grandparents or great-grandparents or a more remote ancestor who had been a Dinosaur; and the features, the movements of our stock were cropping out again in her in an almost shameless fashion, now unrecognizable to the others, and to herself. She was a pretty, gay creature; she immediately had a group of suitors after her, and among them the most constant and the most smitten was Zahn.

It was early summer. The young people were giving a feast on the river. ‘Come with us,’ Zahn invited me, trying to be my friend after all our disagreements; then he immediately went back to swim at the side of the Half-breed.

I went over to Fern-flower. Perhaps the moment had come for us to speak openly, to come to an understanding. ‘What did you dream last night?’ I asked, to break the ice.

She hung her head. ‘I saw a wounded Dinosaur, writhing and dying. He had bowed his noble, delicate head, and he suffered and suffered … I looked at him, couldn’t take my eyes off him, and I realized I was feeling a strange pleasure at seeing him suffer …’

Fern-flower’s lips were taut, evil, in an expression I had never noticed in her. I wanted only to show her that in that play of ambiguous, grim feelings I had no part: I was one who enjoyed life, I was the heir of a happy race. I started to dance around her, I splashed river water on her, waving my tail.

‘You can never talk about anything that isn’t sad!’ I said, frivolously. ‘Stop it. Come and dance!’

She didn’t understand me. She made a grimace.

‘And if you don’t dance with me, I’ll dance with another!’ I cried. I grasped the Half-breed by one paw, carrying her off under Zahn’s nose. First he watched us move away without understanding, he was so lost in his amorous contemplation, then he was seized with jealous rage. Too late. The Half-breed and I had already dived into the river and were swimming towards the other bank, to hide in the bushes.

Perhaps I only wanted to show Fern-flower who I really was, to deny the mistaken notions she had of me. And perhaps I was also moved by an old bitterness towards Zahn; I wanted to reject, ostentatiously, his new offer of friendship. Or else, more than anything, it was the familiar and yet unusual form of the Half-breed which made me desire a natural, direct relationship, without secret thoughts, without memories.

The vagabond caravan would be leaving again in the morning. The Half-breed was willing to spend the night in the bushes. I stayed there, dallying with her, until dawn.

These were only ephemeral episodes in a life otherwise calm and uneventful. I had allowed the truth about myself and the era of our domination to vanish into silence. Now they hardly ever talked about the Dinosaurs any more; perhaps nobody believed they had ever existed. Even Fern-flower had stopped dreaming of them.

When she told me: ‘I dreamed that in a cavern there was the sole survivor of a species whose name nobody remembered, and I went to ask it of him, and it was dark, and I knew he was there, and I couldn’t see him, and I knew well who he was and what he looked like but I couldn’t have expressed it, and I didn’t understand if he was answering my questions or I was answering his …’ for me this was a sign that finally an amorous understanding had begun between us, the kind I had wanted since I first stopped at the spring, when I didn’t yet know if I would be allowed to survive.

Since then I had learned many things, and above all the way in which Dinosaurs conquer. First I had believed that disappearing had been, for my brothers, the magnanimous acceptance of a defeat; now I knew that the more the Dinosaurs disappear, the more they extend their dominion, and over forests far more vast than those that cover the continents: in the labyrinth of the survivors’ thoughts. From the semi-darkness of fears and doubts of now ignorant generations, the Dinosaurs continued to extend their necks, to raise their taloned hoofs, and when the last shadow of their image had been erased, their name went on, superimposed on all meanings, perpetuating their presence in relations among living beings. Now, when the name too had been erased, they would become one thing with the mute and anonymous moulds of thought, through which thoughts take on form and substance: by the New Ones, and by those who would come after the New Ones, and those who would come even after them.

I looked around: the village that had seen me arrive as a stranger I could now rightfully call mine, and I could call Fern-flower mine, in the only way a Dinosaur could call something his. For this, with a silent wave, I said goodbye to Fern-flower, left the village, and went off for ever.

Along my way I looked at the trees, the rivers and the mountains, and I could no longer distinguish the ones that had been there during the Dinosaurs’ time from those that had come afterwards. Around some dens a band of vagabonds was camping. From the distance I recognized the Half-breed, still attractive, only a little fatter. To avoid being seen, I headed for the woods and observed her. She was followed by a little son, barely able to stand on his legs and wag his tail. How long had it been since I had seen a little Dinosaur, so perfect, so full of his own Dinosaur essence, and so unaware of what the word ‘Dinosaur’ meant?

I waited for him in a clearing in the woods to watch him play, chase a butterfly, slam a pine cone against a stone to dig out the pine nuts. I went over. It was my son, all right.

He looked at me curiously. ‘Who are you?’ he asked.

‘Nobody,’ I said. ‘What about you? Do you know who you are?’

‘What a question! Everybody knows that: I’m a New One!’ he said.

That was exactly what I had expected to hear him say. I patted his head, said: ‘Good for you,’ and went off.

I travelled through valleys and plains. I came to a station, caught the first train, and was lost in the crowd.





The Form of Space




The equations of the gravitational field which relate the curve of space to the distribution of matter are already becoming common knowledge.

To fall in the void as I fell: none of you knows what that means. For you, to fall means to plunge perhaps from the twenty-sixth floor of a skyscraper, or from an aeroplane which breaks down in flight: to fall headlong, grope in the air a moment, and then the Earth is immediately there, and you get a big bump. But I’m talking about the time when there wasn’t any Earth underneath or anything else solid, not even a celestial body in the distance capable of attracting you into its orbit. You simply fell, indefinitely, for an indefinite length of time. I went down into the void, to the most absolute bottom conceivable, and once there I saw that the extreme limit must have been much, much further below, very remote, and I went on falling, to reach it. Since there were no reference points, I had no idea whether my fall was fast or slow. Now that I think about it, there weren’t even any proofs that I was really falling: perhaps I had always remained immobile in the same place, or I was moving in an upward direction; since there was no above or below these were only nominal questions and so I might just as well go on thinking I was falling, as I was naturally led to think.

Assuming then that one was falling, everyone fell with the same speed and rate of acceleration; in fact we were always more or less on the same level: I, Ursula H’x, Lieutenant Fenimore. I didn’t take my eyes off Ursula H’x: she was very beautiful to see, and in falling she had an easy, relaxed attitude. I hoped I would be able sometimes to catch her eye, but as she fell, Ursula H’x was always intent on filing and polishing her nails or running her comb through her long, smooth hair, and she never glanced towards me. Nor towards Lieutenant Fenimore, I must say, though he did everything he could to attract her attention.

Once I caught him – he thought I couldn’t see him – as he was making some signals to Ursula H’x: first he struck his two index fingers, outstretched, one against the other, then he made a rotating gesture with one hand, then he pointed down. I mean, he seemed to hint at an understanding with her, an appointment for later on, in some place down there, where they were to meet. All nonsense, I knew perfectly well: there were no meetings possible among us, because our falls were parallel and the same distance always remained between us. But the mere fact that Lieutenant Fenimore had got such ideas into his head – and tried to put them into the head of Ursula H’x – was enough to get on my nerves, even though she paid no attention to him, indeed she made a slight blurting sound with her lips, directed – I felt there was no doubt – at him. (Ursula H’x fell, revolving with lazy movements as if she were turning in her bed and it was hard to say whether her gestures were directed at someone else or whether she was playing for her own benefit, as was her habit.)

I too, naturally, dreamed only of meeting Ursula H’x, but since, in my fall, I was following a straight line absolutely parallel to the one she followed, it seemed inappropriate to reveal such an unattainable desire. Of course, if I chose to be an optimist, there was always the possibility that, if our two parallels continued to infinity, the moment would come when they would touch. This eventuality gave me some hope; indeed, it kept me in a state of constant excitement. I don’t mind telling you I had dreamed so much of a meeting of our parallels, in great detail, that it was now a part of my experience, as if I had actually lived it. Everything would happen suddenly, with simplicity and naturalness: after the long separate journey, unable to move an inch closer to each other, after having felt her as an alien being for so long, a prisoner of her parallel route, then the consistency of space, instead of being impalpable as it had always been, would become more taut and, at the same time, looser, a condensing of the void which would seem to come not from outside but from within us, and would press me and Ursula H’x together (I had only to shut my eyes to see her come forward, in an attitude I recognized as hers even if it was different from all her habitual attitudes: her arms stretched down, along her sides, twisting her wrists as if she were stretching and at the same time writhing and leaning forward), and then the invisible line I was following would become a single line, occupied by a mingling of her and me where her soft and secret nature would be penetrated or rather would enfold and, I would say, almost absorb the part of myself that till then had been suffering at being alone and separate and barren.

Even the most beautiful dreams can suddenly turn into nightmares, and it then occurred to me that the meeting point of our two parallels might also be the point at which all parallels existing in space eventually meet, and so it would mark not only my meeting with Ursula H’x but also – dreadful prospect – a meeting with Lieutenant Fenimore. At the very moment when Ursula H’x would cease to be alien to me, another alien with his thin black moustache would share our intimacies in an inextricable way: this thought was enough to plunge me into the most tormented jealous hallucinations: I heard the cry that our meeting – hers and mine – tore from us melt in a spasmodically joyous unison and then – I was aghast at the presentiment – from that sound burst her piercing cry as she was violated – so, in my resentful bias, I imagined – from behind, and at the same time the Lieutenant’s vulgar shout of triumph, but perhaps – and here my jealousy became delirium – these cries of theirs, hers and his, might also not be so different or so dissonant, they might also achieve a unison, be joined in a single cry of downright pleasure, distinct from the sobbing, desperate moan that would burst from my lips.

In this alternation of hopes and apprehensions I continued to fall, constantly peering into the depths of space to see if anything heralded an immediate or future change in our condition. A couple of times I managed to glimpse a universe, but it was far away and seemed very tiny, well off to the right or to the left; I barely had time to make out a certain number of galaxies like shining little dots collected into superimposed masses which revolved with a faint buzz, when everything would vanish as it had appeared, upwards or to one side, so that I began to suspect it had only been a momentary glare in my eyes.

‘There! Look! There’s a universe! Look over there! There’s something!’ shouted to Ursula H’x, motioning in that direction; but, tongue between her teeth, she was busy caressing the smooth, taut skin of her legs, looking for those very rare and almost invisible excess hairs she could uproot with a sharp tug of her pincer-like nails, and the only sign she had heard my call might be the way she stretched one leg upwards, as if to exploit – you would have said – for her methodical inspection the dim light reflected from that distant firmament.

I don’t have to tell you the contempt Lieutenant Fenimore displayed towards what I might have discovered on those occasions: he gave a shrug – shaking his epaulettes, his bandolier and the decorations with which he was pointlessly arrayed – and turned in the other direction, snickering. Unless he was the one (when he was sure I was looking elsewhere) who tried to arouse Ursula’s curiosity (and then it was my turn to laugh, seeing that her only response was to revolve in a kind of somersault, turning her behind to him: a gesture no doubt disrespectful but lovely to see, so that, after rejoicing in my rival’s humiliation, I caught myself envying him this, as a privilege), indicating a labile point fleeing through space, shouting: ‘There! There! A universe! This big! I saw it! It’s a universe!’

I won’t say he was lying: statements of that sort, as far as I know, were as likely to be true as false. It was a proven fact that, every now and then, we skirted a universe (or else a universe skirted us), but it wasn’t clear whether these were a number of universes scattered through space or whether it was always the same universe we kept passing, revolving in a mysterious trajectory, or whether there was no universe at all and what we thought we saw was the mirage of a universe which perhaps had once existed and whose image continued to rebound from the walls of space like the rebounding of an echo. But it could also be that the universes had always been there, dense around us, and had no idea of moving, and we weren’t moving, either, and everything was arrested for ever, without time, in a darkness punctuated only by rapid flashes when something or someone managed for a moment to free himself from that sluggish timelessness and indicate the semblance of a movement.

All these hypotheses were equally worth considering, but they interested me only in so far as they concerned our fall and the possibility of touching Ursula H’x. In other words, nobody really knew anything. So why did that pompous Fenimore sometimes assume a superior manner, as if he were certain of things? He had realized that when he wanted to infuriate me the surest system was to pretend to a longstanding familiarity with Ursula H’x. At a certain point Ursula took to swaying as she came down, her knees together, shifting the weight of her body this way and that, as if wavering in an ever-broader zigzag: just to break the monotony of that endless fall. And the Lieutenant then also started swaying, trying to pick up her rhythm, as if he were following the same invisible track, or rather as if he were dancing to the sound of the same music, audible only to the two of them, which he even pretended to whistle, putting into it, on his own, a kind of unspoken understanding, as if alluding to a private joke among old boozing companions. It was all a bluff – I knew that, of course – but still it gave me the idea that a meeting between Ursula H’x and Lieutenant Fenimore might already have taken place, who knows how long ago, at the beginning of their trajectories, and this suspicion gnawed at me painfully, as if I had been the victim of an injustice. On reflecting, however, I reasoned that if Ursula and the Lieutenant had once occupied the same point in space, this meant that their respective lines of fall had since been moving apart and presumably were still moving apart. Now, in this slow but constant removal from the Lieutenant, it was more than likely that Ursula was coming closer to me; so the Lieutenant had little to boast of in his past conjunctions: I was the one at whom the future smiled.

The process of reasoning that led me to this conclusion was not enough to reassure me at heart: the possibility that Ursula H’x had already met the Lieutenant was in itself a wrong which, if it had been done to me, could no longer be redeemed. I must add that past and future were vague terms for me, and I couldn’t make much distinction between them: my memory didn’t extend beyond the interminable present of our parallel fall, and what might have been before, since it couldn’t be remembered, belonged to the same imaginary world as the future, and was confounded with the future. So I could also suppose that if two parallels had ever set out from the same point, these were the lines that Ursula H’x and I were following (in this case it was nostalgia for a lost oneness that fed my eager desire to meet her); however, I was reluctant to believe in this hypothesis, because it might imply a progressive separation and perhaps her future arrival in the braid-festooned arms of Lieutenant Fenimore, but chiefly because I couldn’t get out of the present except to imagine a different present, and none of the rest counted.

Perhaps this was the secret: to identify oneself so completely with one’s own state of fall that one could realize the line followed in falling wasn’t what it seemed but another, or rather to succeed in changing that line in the only way it could be changed, namely, by making it become what it had really always been. It wasn’t through concentrating on myself that this idea came to me, though, but through observing, with my loving eye, how beautiful Ursula H’x was even when seen from behind, and noting, as we passed in sight of a very distant system of constellations, an arching of her back and a kind of twitch of her behind, but not so much the behind itself as an external sliding that seemed to rub past the behind and cause a not unpleasant reaction from the behind itself. This fleeting impression was enough to make me see our situation in a new way: if it was true that space with something inside is different from empty space because the matter causes a curving or a tautness which makes all the lines contained in space curve or tauten, then the line each of us was following was straight in the only way a straight line can be straight: namely, deformed to the extent that the limpid harmony of the general void is deformed by the clutter of matter, in other words, twisting all around this bump or pimple or excrescence which is the universe in the midst of space.

My point of reference was always Ursula and, in fact, a certain way she had of proceeding as if twisting could make more familiar the idea that our fall was like a winding and unwinding in a sort of spiral that tightened and then loosened. However, Ursula – if you watched her carefully – wound first in one direction, then in the other, so the pattern we were tracing was more complicated. The universe, therefore, had to be considered not a crude swelling placed there like a turnip, but as an angular, pointed figure where every dent or bulge or facet corresponded to other cavities and projections and notchings of space and of the lines we followed. This, however, was still a schematic image, as if we were dealing with a smooth-walled solid, a compenetration of polyhedrons, a cluster of crystals; in reality the space in which we moved was all battlemented and perforated, with spires and pinnacles which spread out on every side, with cupolas and balustrades and peristyles, with rose windows, with double-and triple-arched fenestrations, and while we felt we were plunging straight down, in reality we were racing along the edge of mouldings and invisible friezes, like ants who, crossing a city, follow itineraries traced not on the street cobbles but along walls and ceilings and cornices and chandeliers. Now if I say city it amounts to suggesting figures that are, in some way, regular, with right angles and symmetrical proportions, whereas instead, we should always bear in mind how space breaks up around every cherry tree and every leaf of every bough that moves in the wind, and at every indentation of the edge of every leaf, and also it forms along every vein of the leaf, and on the network of veins inside the leaf, and on the piercings made every moment by the riddling arrows of light, all printed in negative in the dough of the void, so that there is nothing now that does not leave its print, every possible print of every possible thing, and together every transformation of these prints, instant by instant, so the pimple growing on a caliph’s nose or the soap bubble resting on a laundress’s bosom changes the general form of space in all its dimensions.

All I had to do was understand that space was made in this way and I realized there were certain soft cavities hollowed in it as welcoming as hammocks where I could lie joined with Ursula H’x, the two of us swaying together, biting each other in turn along all our persons. The properties of space, in fact, were such that one parallel went one way, and another in another way: I for example was plunging within a tortuous cavern while Ursula H’x was being sucked along a passage communicating with that same cavern so that we found ourselves rolling together on a lawn of algae in a kind of subspatial island, writhing, she and I, in every pose, upright and capsized, until all of a sudden our two straight lines resumed their distance, the same as always, and each continued on its own as if nothing had happened.

The grain of space was porous and broken with crevasses and dunes. If I looked carefully, I could observe when Lieutenant Fenimore’s course passed through the bed of a narrow, winding canyon; then I placed myself on the top of a cliff and, at just the right moment, I hurled myself down on him, careful to strike him on the cervical vertebrae with my full weight. The bottom of such precipices in the void was stony as the bed of a dried-up stream, and Lieutenant Fenimore, sinking to the ground, remained with his head stuck between two spurs of rock; I pressed one knee into his stomach, but he meanwhile was crushing my knuckles against a cactus’s thorns – or the back of a porcupine? (spikes, in any case, of the kind corresponding to certain sharp contractions of space) – to prevent me from grabbing the pistol I had kicked from his hand. I don’t know how I happened, a moment later, to find myself with my head thrust into the stifling granulosity of the strata where space gives way, crumbling like sand; I spat, blinded and dazed; Fenimore had managed to collect his pistol; a bullet whistled past my ear, ricocheting off a proliferation of the void that rose in the shape of an anthill. And I fell upon him, my hands at his throat, to strangle him, but my hands slammed against each other with a ‘plop!’: our paths had become parallel again, and Lieutenant Fenimore and I were descending, maintaining our customary distance, ostentatiously turning our backs on each other, like two people who pretend they have never met, haven’t even seen each other before.

What you might consider straight, one-dimensional lines were similar, in effect, to lines of handwriting made on a white page by a pen that shifts words and fragments of sentences from one line to another, with insertions and cross-references, in the haste to finish an exposition which has gone through successive, approximate drafts, always unsatisfactory; and so we pursued each other, Lieutenant Fenimore and I, hiding behind the loops of the l’s, especially the l’s of the word ‘parallel’, in order to shoot and take cover from the bullets and pretend to be dead and wait, say, till Fenimore went past in order to trip him up and drag him by his feet, slamming his chin against the bottoms of the v’s and the u’s and the m’s and the n’s which, written all evenly in an italic hand, became a bumpy succession of holes in the pavement (for example, in the expression ‘one-dimensional universe’), leaving him stretched out in a place all trampled with erasings, then standing up there again, stained with clotted ink, to run towards Ursula H’x, who was trying to act sly, slipping behind the tails of the f which trail off until they become wisps, but I could seize her by the hair and bend her against a d or a t just as I write them now, in haste, bent, so you can recline against them, then we might dig a niche for ourselves down in a g, in the g of ‘big’, a subterranean den which can be adapted as we choose to our dimensions, being made more cosy and almost invisible or else arranged more horizontally so you can stretch out in it. Whereas naturally the same lines, rather than remain series of letters and words, can easily be drawn out in their black thread and unwound in continuous, parallel, straight lines which mean nothing beyond themselves in their constant flow, never meeting, just as we never meet in our constant fall: I, Ursula H’x, Lieutenant Fenimore, and all the others.





The Light-Years




The more distant a galaxy is, the more swiftly it moves away from us. A galaxy located at ten billion light-years from us would have a speed of recession equal to the speed of light, three hundred thousand kilometres per second. The ‘quasars’ recently discovered are already approaching this threshold.

One night I was, as usual, observing the sky with my telescope. I noticed that a sign was hanging from a galaxy a hundred million light-years away. On it was written: I SAW YOU. I made a quick calculation: the galaxy’s light had taken a hundred million years to reach me, and since they saw up there what was taking place here a hundred million years later, the moment when they had seen me must date back two hundred million years.

Even before I checked my diary to see what I had been doing that day, I was seized by a ghastly presentiment: exactly two hundred million years before, not a day more nor a day less, something had happened to me that I had always tried to hide. I had hoped that with the passage of time the episode had been completely forgotten; it was in sharp contrast – at least, so it seemed to me – with my customary behaviour before and after that date: so, if ever anybody wanted to dig up that business again, I was ready to deny it quite calmly, and not only because it would have been impossible to furnish proof, but also because an action determined by such exceptional conditions – even if it was really verified – was so improbable that it could be considered untrue in all good faith, even by me. Instead, from a distant celestial body, here was somebody who had seen me, and the story was cropping up again, now of all times.

Naturally, I was in a position to explain everything that had happened, and what caused it to happen, and to make my own behaviour completely comprehensible, if not excusable. I thought of replying at once with a sign, using a phrase in my own defence, like LET ME EXPLAIN or else I’D LIKE TO HAVE SEEN YOU IN MY PLACE, but this wouldn’t have been enough and the things that would have to be said were too many to be compressed into a short statement legible at such a distance. And above all, I had to be careful not to make a misstep, not to reinforce with an explicit admission what that I SAW YOU merely hinted at. In short, before leaving myself open with any declaration I would have to know exactly what they had seen from the galaxy and what they hadn’t: and for this purpose all I could do was ask, using a sign on the order of DID YOU REALLY SEE EVERYTHING OR JUST A LITTLE BIT? or perhaps LET’S SEE IF YOU’RE TELLING THE TRUTH: WHAT WAS I DOING?, then I would have to wait long enough for them to be able to see my sign, and then an equally long period until I could see their answer and attend to the necessary rectifications. All this would take another two hundred million years, or rather a few million years more, because while the images were coming and going with the speed of light, the galaxies continued to move apart, therefore that constellation now was no longer where I had seen it, but a bit further on, and the image of my sign would have to chase it. I mean, it was a slow system, which would have obliged me to discuss again, more than four hundred million years after they had happened, those events that I wanted to make everyone forget in the shortest possible time.

I thought the best line to take was to act as if nothing had happened, minimize the importance of what they might have found out. So I hastened to expose, in full view, a sign on which I had written simply: WHAT OF IT? If up in the galaxy they had thought they would embarrass me with their I SAW YOU, my calm would disconcert them, and they would be convinced there was no point in dwelling on that episode. If, at the same time, they didn’t have much information against me, a vague expression like WHAT OF IT? would be useful as a feeler, to see how seriously I should take their affirmation I SAW YOU. The distance separating us (from its dock of a hundred million light-years away the galaxy had sailed a million centuries before, journeying into the darkness) would perhaps make it less obvious that my WHAT OF IT? was replying to their I SAW YOU of two hundred million years before, but it didn’t seem wise to include more explicit references in the new sign, because if the memory of that day, after three million centuries, was becoming dim, I certainly didn’t want to be the one to refresh it.

After all, the opinion they might have formed of me, on that single occasion, shouldn’t worry me too much. The facts of my life, the ones that had followed, after that day, for years and centuries and millennia, testified – at least the great majority of them – in my favour; so I had only to let the facts speak for themselves. If, from that distant celestial body, they had seen what I was doing one day two hundred million years ago, they must have seen me also the following day, and the day after that, and the next and the next, and they would gradually have modified the first negative opinion of me they might have formed, hastily, on the basis of an isolated episode. In fact, when I thought how many years had already gone by since that I SAW YOU, I was convinced the bad impression must now have been erased by time and followed by a probably positive evaluation, or one, in any case, that corresponded more to reality. However, this rational certainty was not enough to afford me relief: until I had the proof of a change of opinion in my favour, I would remain uneasy at having been caught in an embarrassing position and identified with it, nailed fast in that situation.

Now you will say I could very well have shrugged off the opinion of me held by some strangers living on a remote constellation. As a matter of fact, what worried me wasn’t the limited opinion of this or that celestial body, but the suspicion that the consequences of their having seen me might be limitless. Around that galaxy there were many others, some with a radius shorter by a hundred million light-years, with observers who kept their eyes open: the I SAW YOU sign, before I had glimpsed it, had certainly been read by inhabitants of other celestial bodies, and the same thing would have happened afterwards on the gradually more distant constellations. Even if no one could know precisely to what specific situation that I SAW YOU referred, this indefiniteness would not in the least be to my advantage. On the contrary, since people are always ready to believe the worst, what I might really have been seen doing at a distance of a hundred million light-years was, after all, nothing compared to everything that elsewhere they might imagine had been seen. The bad impression I may have left during that moment of heedlessness two million centuries ago would then be enlarged and multiplied, refracted across all the galaxies of the universe, nor was it possible for me to deny it without making the situation worse, since, not knowing what extreme and slanderous deductions those who hadn’t directly seen me might have come to, I had no idea where to begin and where to end my denials.

In this state of mind, I kept looking around every night with my telescope. And after two nights I noticed that on a galaxy at a distance of a hundred million years and one light-day they had also put up a sign: I SAW YOU. There could be no doubt that they were also referring to that time: what I had always tried to hide had been discovered not by only one celestial body but also by another located in quite a different zone in space. And by still others: in the nights that followed I continued to see new signs with I SAW YOU on them, set on different constellations every time. From a calculation of the light-years it emerged that the moment when they had seen me was always the same. To each of these I SAW YOUS I answered with signs marked by contemptuous indifference, such as OH REALLY? HOW NICE or else FAT LOT I CARE, or else by an almost provocative mockery, such as TANT PIS or else LOOK! IT’S ME!, but still retaining my reserve.

Though the logic of the situation led me to regard the future with reasonable optimism, the convergence of all those I SAW YOUs on a single point in my life, a convergence surely fortuitous, due to special conditions of interstellar visibility (the single exception was one celestial body where, corresponding to that same date, a sign appeared saying WE CAN’T SEE A DAMN THING), kept me in a constant state of nerves.

It was as if in the space containing all the galaxies the image of what I had done that day were being projected in the interior of a sphere that swelled constantly, at the speed of light: the observers of the celestial bodies that gradually came within the sphere’s radius were enabled to see what had happened. Each of these observers could, in turn, be considered the centre of a sphere also expanding at the speed of light, projecting the words I SAW YOU on their signs all around. At the same time, all these celestial bodies belonged to galaxies moving away from one another in space at a speed proportional to the distance, and every observer who indicated he had received a message, before he could receive a second one, had already moved off through space at a constantly increasing speed. At a certain point the furthest galaxies that had seen me (or had seen the I SAW YOU sign from a galaxy closer to us, or the I SAW THE I SAW YOU from a bit further on) would reach the ten-billion-light-year threshold, beyond which they would move off at three hundred thousand kilometres per second, the speed of light, and no image would be able to overtake them after that. So there was the risk that they would remain with their temporary mistaken opinion of me, which from that moment on would become definitive, no longer rectifiable, beyond all appeal and therefore, in a sense, correct, corresponding to the truth.

So it was indispensable to clear up the misunderstanding as quickly as possible. And to clear it up, I could hope for only one thing: that, after that occasion, I had been seen other times, when I gave another image of myself, the one that was – I had no doubts on this score – the true image of me that should be remembered. In the course of the last two hundred million years, there had been no lack of opportunities, and for me just one, very clear, would be enough, to avoid confusion. Now, for example, I recalled a day when I had really been myself, I mean myself in the way I wanted others to see me. This day – I calculated rapidly – had been exactly one hundred million years ago. So, on the galaxy a hundred million light-years away they were seeing me at this very moment in that situation so flattering to my prestige, and their opinion of me was surely changing, modifying, or rather refuting, that first fleeting impression. Right now, or thereabouts: because now the distance that separated us was no longer a hundred million light-years, but a hundred and one; anyhow I had only to wait an equal number of years to allow the light there to arrive here (the date when that would happen was easily calculated, bearing Hubble’s constant in mind) and then I would learn their reaction.

Those who had managed to see me at moment x would, all the more surely, have seen me at moment y, and since my image in y was much more convincing than in x – indeed, I would call it more inspiring, unforgettable – they would remember me in y, whereas what had been seen of me in x would be forgotten immediately, erased, perhaps after having been fleetingly recalled to mind, in a kind of dismissal, as if to say: Just think, one who is like y can by chance be seen as x and you might believe he is x although it’s clear that he’s absolutely y.

I was almost cheered by the number of I SAW YOUS still appearing all around, because it meant that interest in me was aroused and therefore my more radiant day would escape no one. It would have (or rather, was already having, beyond my knowledge) a much wider resonance than the sort – limited to given surroundings and, moreover, I must admit, rather marginal – which I, in my modesty, had formerly expected.

You must also consider those celestial bodies from which – through absent-mindedness or bad placing – they hadn’t seen me but only a nearby I SAW YOU sign; they had also set up signs saying: LOOKS AS IF THEY’VE SEEN YOU or else FROM WHERE THEY ARE THEY CAN SEE YOU! (expressions in which I sensed a touch of curiosity or of sarcasm); on those bodies, too, there were eyes trained on me and now, precisely because they had missed one opportunity, they would hardly allow a second to escape them, and having received only indirect and hearsay information about x, they would be all the more ready to accept y as the only true reality concerning me.

So the echo of the moment y would be propagated through time and space, it would reach the most distant, the fastest galaxies, and they would elude all further images, racing at light’s speed of three hundred thousand kilometres per second and taking that now definitive image of me beyond time and space, where it would become the truth containing in its sphere with unlimited radius all the other spheres with their partial and contradictory truths.

A hundred million centuries or so, after all, aren’t an eternity, but to me they seemed never to go by. Finally the night arrived: I had long since aimed my telescope at that same galaxy of the first time. I moved my right eye, its lid half closed, to the eyepiece, I raised my eyelid slowly, and there was the constellation, perfectly framed, and there was a sign in its midst, the words as yet indistinct. I focused better … There was written: TRA-LA-LA-LA. Just that: TRA-LA-LA-LA. At the moment when I had expressed the essence of my personality, with abundant evidence and with no risk of misinterpretation, at the moment when I had furnished the key to interpreting all the acts of my past and future life and to forming an overall and objective opinion, what had they seen, they who had not only the opportunity but also the moral obligation to observe and note what I was doing? They hadn’t seen anything, hadn’t been aware of anything, hadn’t observed anything special. To discover that such a great part of my reputation was at the mercy of a character who was so untrustworthy left me prostrate. That proof of myself, which – because of the various favourable circumstances that had accompanied it – I considered incapable of repetition, had gone by unobserved, wasted, definitely lost for a whole zone of the universe, only because that gentleman had allowed himself five minutes of idleness, of relaxation, we might as well say of irresponsibility, his head in the air like an idiot, perhaps in the euphoria of someone who has had a drop too much, and on his sign he had found nothing better to write than a meaningless scrawl, perhaps the silly tune that he had been whistling, forgetting his duties, TRA-LA-LA-LA.

Only one thought afforded me some comfort: the thought that on the other galaxies there were bound to be more diligent observers. Until then I had never been so pleased at the great number of spectators that the old, and unfortunate, episode had had; now they would be ready to perceive the new situation. I returned to the telescope, night after night. A few nights later a galaxy at the proper distance appeared to me in all its splendour. It had a sign. And on it was written this sentence: YOU HAVE A FLANNEL UNDERSHIRT.

Tears in my eyes, I racked my brain for an explanation. Perhaps in that place, with the passage of time, they had so perfected their telescopes that they amused themselves by observing the most insignificant details, the undershirt a person wore, whether it was flannel or cotton, and all the rest meant nothing to them, they paid no attention to it at all. And, for them, my honourable act, my – shall we say? – magnanimous and generous act, had gone for nothing; they had retained only one element, my flannel undershirt: an excellent undershirt, to be sure, and perhaps at another moment I would have been pleased at their noticing it, but not then, oh no, not then.

In any case, I had many other witnesses awaiting me: it was only natural that, out of the whole number, some should fail; I wasn’t the sort of person to become distraught over such a little setback. In fact, from a galaxy a bit further on, I finally had the proof that someone had seen perfectly how I had behaved and had evaluated my action properly, that is, enthusiastically. Indeed, on a sign he had written: THAT CHARACTER’S REALLY ON THE BALL. I noted it with complete satisfaction – a satisfaction, mind you, which merely confirmed my expectation, or rather my certainty that my merits would be suitably recognized – but then the expression THAT CHARACTER attracted my attention. Why did they call me THAT CHARACTER, if they already knew me and had seen me, even in that unfortunate circumstance? Shouldn’t I be quite familiar to them already? With some adjustment, I improved the focus of my telescope and discovered, at the bottom of the same sign, another sentence written in smaller letters: WHO THE HELL CAN HE BE? Can you imagine a worse stroke of luck? Those who held the key to understanding who I really was hadn’t recognized me. They hadn’t connected this praiseworthy episode with that deplorable incident two hundred million years earlier, so the deplorable incident was still attributed to me, and the other wasn’t, the other remained an impersonal, anonymous anecdote, which didn’t belong to anyone’s history.

My first impulse was to brandish a sign: IT’S ME! I gave up the idea: what would be the good of it? They would see it more than a hundred million years after moment x had gone by; we were approaching the half-billion mark; to be sure of making myself understood I would have to specify, dig up that old business again, and this was just what I wanted most to avoid.

By now I had lost my self-confidence. I was afraid I wouldn’t receive any greater amends from the other galaxies, either. Those who had seen me had seen me in a partial, fragmentary, careless way, or had understood only up to a point what was happening, missing the essential quality, not analysing the elements of my personality which, from one situation to the next, were thrown into relief.

Only one sign said what I had really been expecting: YOU KNOW SOMETHING? YOU’RE REALLY ON THE BALL! I hastened to leaf through my notebook, to see what reactions had come from that galaxy at moment x. By coincidence, that was the very place where the sign had appeared saying WE CAN’T SEE A DAMN THING. In that zone of the universe, I surely enjoyed a higher esteem, no denying that, and I ought to have rejoiced at last, but instead I felt no satisfaction at all. I realized that, since these admirers of mine weren’t those who might earlier have formed an unfavourable opinion of me, I didn’t give a damn about them. The assurance that moment y had re-futed and erased moment x couldn’t come to me from them, and my uneasiness continued, exacerbated by the great length of time and by my not knowing whether the causes of my dismay were there and whether or not they would be dispelled.

Naturally, for the observers scattered over the universe, moment x and moment y were only two among countless observable moments, and in fact, every night on the constellations located at the most varied distances signs appeared referring to other episodes, signs saying KEEP GOING: YOU’RE ON THE RIGHT TRACK, THERE YOU GO AGAIN, WATCH YOUR STEP, I TOLD YOU SO. For each of them I could work out the calculation, the light-years from here to there, the light-years from there to here, and establish which episode they were referring to: all the actions of my life, every time I picked my nose, all the times I managed to jump down from a moving tram, were still there, travelling from one galaxy to another, and they were being considered, commented on, judged. The comments and judgements were not always pertinent: the sign TCHK TCHK applied to the time I gave a third of my salary to a charity subscription; the sign THIS TIME I LIKE YOU, to when I had forgotten in a train the manuscript of a treatise that had cost me years of study; my famous prolusion at the University of Göttingen was commented on with the words: WATCH OUT FOR DRAUGHTS.

In a certain sense, I could set my mind at rest: no action of mine, good or bad, was completely lost. At least an echo of it was always saved; or rather, several echoes, which varied from one end of the universe to the other, and in that sphere which was expanding and generating other spheres; but the echoes were discontinuous, conflicting pieces of information, inessential, from which the nexus of my actions didn’t emerge, and a new action was unable to explain or correct an old one, so they remained one next to the other, with a plus or minus sign, like a long, long polynomial which cannot be reduced to a more simple expression.

What could I do, at this point? To keep bothering with the past was useless; so far it had gone the way it had gone; I had to make sure the future went better. The important thing was that, in everything I did, it should be clear what was essential, where the stress should be placed, what was to be noted and what not. I procured an enormous directional sign, one of those huge hands with the pointing index finger. When I performed an action to which I wanted to call attention, I had only to raise that sign, trying to make the finger point at the most important detail of the scene. For the moments when, instead, I preferred not to be observed, I made another sign, a hand with the thumb pointing in the direction opposite the one I was turning, to distract attention.

All I had to do was carry those signs wherever I went and raise one or the other, according to the occasion. It was a long-term operation, naturally: the observers hundreds of thousands of light-years away would be hundreds of thousands of millennia late in perceiving what I was doing now, and I would have to wait more hundreds of thousands of millennia to read their reactions. This delay was inevitable; but there was, unfortunately, another drawback I hadn’t foreseen: what could I do when I realized I had raised the wrong sign?

For example, at a certain moment I was sure I was about to do something that would give me dignity and prestige; I hastened to wave the sign with the index finger pointed at me; and at that very moment I happened to make a dreadful faux pas, something unforgivable, a display of human wretchedness to make you sink into the ground in shame. But it was done; that image, with the pointing sign, was already navigating through space, nobody could stop it, it was devouring the light-years, spreading among the galaxies, arousing in the millions of future centuries comments and laughter and turned-up noses, which from the depths of the millennia would return to me and would force me to still clumsier excuses, to more embarrassed attempts at correction …

Another day, instead, I had to face an unpleasant situation, one of those situations in life that one is obliged to live through, knowing that, whatever happens, there’s no way of showing up well. I shielded myself with the sign with the thumb pointing in the other way, and I went off. Unexpectedly, in that delicate and ticklish situation, I displayed quick-wittedness, a balance, a tact, a decisiveness that no one – myself least of all – had ever suspected in me: I suddenly revealed hidden talents that implied a long ripening of character; and meanwhile the sign was deflecting the observers’ gaze, making them look at a pot of peonies nearby.

Cases like these, which at first I considered exceptions, the result of my inexperience, kept happening to me more and more frequently. Too late I realized I should have pointed out what I hadn’t wanted seen and should have hidden what I had instead pointed out: there was no way to arrive before the image and to warn them not to pay attention to the sign.

I tried making a third sign with the word CORRECTION, to raise when I wanted to annul the preceding sign, but in every galaxy this image would have been seen only after the one it was meant to correct, and by then the harm was done and I would only seem doubly ridiculous, and to neutralize that with another sign, IGNORE CORRECTION, would have been equally useless.

I went on living, waiting for the remote moment when, from the galaxies, the comments on the new episodes would arrive, charged for me with embarrassment and uneasiness; then I would be able to rebut, sending off my messages of reply, which I was already pondering, each dictated by the situation. Meanwhile, the galaxies for whom I was most compromised were already revolving around the threshold of the billions of light-years at such speeds that, to reach them, my messages would have to struggle across space, clinging to their accelerating flight: then, one by one, they would disappear from the last ten-billion-light-year horizon beyond which no visible object can be seen, and they would bear with them a judgement by then irrevocable.

And, thinking of this judgement I would no longer be able to change, I suddenly felt a kind of relief, as if peace could come to me only after the moment when there would be nothing to add and nothing to remove in that arbitrary ledger of misunderstandings, and the galaxies which were gradually reduced to the last tail of the last luminous ray, winding from the sphere of darkness, seemed to bring with them the only possible truth about myself, and I couldn’t wait until all of them, one after the other, had followed this path.





The Spiral




For the majority of molluscs, the visible organic form has little importance in the life of the members of a species, since they cannot see one another and have, at most, only a vague perception of other individuals and of their surroundings. This does not prevent brightly coloured stripings and forms which seem very beautiful to our eyes (as in many gastropod shells) from existing independently of any relationship to visibility.





I




Like me, when I was clinging to that rock, you mean? – Qfwfq asked – With the waves rising and falling, and me there, still, flat, sucking what there was to suck and thinking about it all the time? If that’s the time you want to know about, there isn’t much I can tell you. Form? I didn’t have any; that is, I didn’t know I had one, or rather I didn’t know you could have one. I grew more or less on all sides, at random; if this is what you call radial symmetry, I suppose I had radial symmetry, but to tell you the truth I never paid any attention to it. Why should I have grown more on one side than on the other? I had no eyes, no head, no part of the body that was different from any other part; now I try to persuade myself that the two holes I had were a mouth and an anus, and that I therefore already had my bilateral symmetry, just like the trilobites and the rest of you, but in my memory I really can’t tell those holes apart, I passed stuff from whatever side I felt like, inside or outside was the same, differences and repugnances came along much later. Every now and then I was seized by fantasies, that’s true; for example, the notion of scratching my armpit, or crossing my legs, or once even of growing a moustache. I use these words here with you, to make myself clear; then there were many details I couldn’t foresee: I had some cells, one more or less the same as another, and they all did more or less the same job. But since I had no form I could feel all possible forms in myself, and all actions and expressions and possibilities of making noises, even rude ones. In short, there were no limitations to my thoughts, which weren’t thoughts, after all, because I had no brain to think them; every cell on its own thought every thinkable thing all at once, not through images, since we had no images of any kind at our disposal, but simply in that indeterminate way of feeling oneself there, which did not prevent us from feeling ourselves equally there in some other way.

It was a rich and free and contented condition, my condition at that time, quite the contrary of what you might think. I was a bachelor (our system of reproduction in those days didn’t require even temporary couplings), healthy, without too many ambitions. When you’re young, all evolution lies before you, every road is open to you, and at the same time you can enjoy the fact of being there on the rock, flat mollusc-pulp, damp and happy. If you compare yourself with the limitations that came afterwards, if you think of how having one form excludes other forms, of the monotonous routine where you finally feel trapped, well, I don’t mind saying, life was beautiful in those days.

To be sure, I lived a bit withdrawn into myself, that’s true, no comparison with our interrelated life nowadays; and I’ll also admit that – partly because of my age and partly under the influence of my surroundings – I was what they call a narcissist to a slight extent; I mean I stayed there observing myself all the time, I saw all my good points and all my defects, and I liked myself for the former and for the latter; I had no terms of comparison, you must remember that, too.

But I wasn’t so backward that I didn’t know something else existed beyond me: the rock where I clung, obviously, and also the water that reached me with every wave, but other stuff, too, further on: that is, the world. The water was a source of information, reliable and precise: it brought me edible substances which I absorbed through all my surface, and other inedible ones which still helped me form an idea of what there was around. The system worked like this: a wave would come, and I, still sticking to the rock, would raise myself up a little bit, imperceptibly – all I had to do was loosen the pressure slightly – and, splat, the water passed beneath me, full of substances and sensations and stimuli. You never knew how those stimuli were going to turn out, sometimes a tickling that made you die laughing, other times a shudder, a burning, an itch; so it was a constant seesaw of amusement and emotion. But you mustn’t think I just lay there passively, dumbly accepting everything that came: after a while I had acquired some experience and I was quick to analyse what sort of stuff was arriving and to decide how I should behave, to make the best use of it or to avoid the more unpleasant consequences. It was all a kind of game of contractions, with each of the cells I had, or of relaxing at the right moment: and I could make my choices, reject, attract, even spit.

And so I learned that there were the others, the element surrounding me was filled with traces of them, others hostile and different from me or else disgustingly similar. No, now I’m giving you a disagreeable idea of my character, which is all wrong. Naturally, each of us went about on his own business, but the presence of the others reassured me, created an inhabited zone around me, freed me from the fear of being an alarming exception, which I would have been if the fact of existing had been my fate alone, a kind of exile.

So I knew that some of the others were female. The water transmitted a special vibration, a kind of brrrum brrrum brrrum, I remember when I became aware of it the first time, or rather, not the first, I remember when I became aware of being aware of it as a thing I had always known. At the discovery of these vibrations’ existence, I was seized with a great curiosity, not so much to see them, or to be seen by them either – since, first, we hadn’t any sight, and secondly, the sexes weren’t yet differentiated, each individual was identical with every other individual and in looking at one or another I would have felt no more pleasure than in looking at myself – but a curiosity to know whether something would happen between me and them. A desperation filled me, a desire not to do anything special, which would have been out of place, knowing that there was nothing special to do, or non-special either, but to respond in some way to that vibration with a corresponding vibration, or rather, with a personal vibration of my own, because, sure enough, there was something there that wasn’t exactly the same as the other, I mean now you might say it came from hormones, but for me it was very beautiful.

So then, one of them, shlup shlup shlup, emitted her eggs, and I, shlup shlup shlup, fertilized them: all down inside the sea, mingling in the water tepid from the sun; oh, I forgot to tell you, I could feel the sun, which warmed the sea and heated the rock.

One of them, I said. Because, among all those female messages that the sea slammed against me like an indistinct soup at first where everything was all right with me and I grubbed about paying no attention to what one was like or another, suddenly I understood what corresponded best to my tastes, tastes which I hadn’t known before that moment, of course. In other words, I had fallen in love. What I mean is: I had begun to recognize, to isolate the signs of one of those from the others, in fact I waited for these signs I had begun to recognize, I sought them, responded to those signs I awaited with other signs I made myself, or rather it was I who aroused them, these signs from her, which I answered with other signs of my own, I mean I was in love with her and she with me, so what more could I want from life?

Now habits have changed, and it already seems inconceivable to you that one could love a female like that, without having spent any time with her. And yet, through that unmistakable part of her still in solution in the sea water, which the waves placed at my disposal, I received a quantity of information about her, more than you can imagine: not the superficial, generic information you get now, seeing and smelling and touching and hearing a voice, but essential information, which I could then develop at length in my imagination. I could think of her with minute precision, thinking not so much of how she was made, which would have been a banal and vulgar way of thinking of her, but of how from her present formlessness she would be transformed into one of the infinite possible forms, still remaining herself, however. I didn’t imagine the forms that she might assume, but I imagined the special quality that, in taking them, she would give to those forms.

I knew her well, in other words. And I wasn’t sure of her. Every now and then I was overcome with suspicion, anxiety, rage. I didn’t let anything show, you know my character, but beneath that impassive mask passed suppositions I can’t bring myself to confess even now. More than once I suspected she was unfaithful to me, that she sent messages not only to me but also to others; more than once I thought I had intercepted one, or that I had discovered a tone of insincerity in a message addressed to me. I was jealous, I can admit it now, not so much out of distrust of her as out of unsureness of myself: who could assure me that she had really understood who I was? Or that she had understood the fact that I was? This relationship achieved between us thanks to the sea water – a full, complete relationship, what more could I ask for? – was for me something absolutely personal, between two unique and distinct individualities; but for her? Who could assure me that what she might find in me she hadn’t also found in another, or in another two or three or ten or a hundred like me? Who could assure me that her abandon in our shared relations wasn’t an indiscriminate abandon, slapdash, a kind of ‘who’s next?’ collective ecstasy?

The fact that these suspicions did not correspond to the truth was confirmed, for me, by the subtle, soft, private vibration, at times still trembling with modesty, in our correspondences; but what if, precisely out of shyness and inexperience, she didn’t pay enough attention to my characteristics and others took advantage of this innocence to worm their way in? And what if she, a novice, believed it was still I and couldn’t distinguish one from the other, and so our most intimate play was extended to a circle of strangers …?

It was then that I began to secrete calcareous matter. I wanted to make something to mark my presence in an unmistakable fashion, something that would defend this individual presence of mine from the indiscriminate instability of all the rest. Now it’s no use my piling up words, trying to explain the novelty of this intention I had; the first word I said is more than enough: make, I wanted to make, and considering the fact that I had never made anything or thought you could make anything, this in itself was a big event. So I began to make the first thing that occurred to me, and it was a shell. From the margin of that fleshy cloak on my body, using certain glands, I began to give off secretions which took on a curving shape all around, until I was covered with a hard and variegated shield, rough on the outside and smooth and shiny inside. Naturally, I had no way of controlling the form of what I was making: I just stayed there all huddled up, silent and sluggish, and I secreted. I went on even after the shell covered my whole body; I began another turn; in short, I was getting one of those shells all twisted into a spiral, which you, when you see them, think are so hard to make, but all you have to do is keep working and giving off the same matter without stopping, and they grow like that, one turn after the other.

Once it existed, this shell was also a necessary and indispensable place to stay inside of, a defence for my survival; it was a lucky thing I had made it, but while I was making it I had no idea of making it because I needed it; on the contrary, it was like when somebody lets out an exclamation he could perfectly well not make, and yet he makes it, like ‘Ha’ or ‘hmph!’, that’s how I made the shell: simply to express myself. And in this self-expression I put all the thoughts I had about her, I released the anger she made me feel, my amorous way of thinking about her, my determination to exist for her, the desire for me to be me, and for her to be her, and the love for myself that I put in my love for her – all the things that could be said only in that conch shell wound into a spiral.

At regular intervals the calcareous matter I was secreting came out coloured, so a number of lovely stripes were formed running straight through the spirals, and this shell was a thing different from me but also the truest part of me, the explanation of who I was, my portrait translated into a rhythmic system of volumes and stripes and colours and hard matter, and it was the portrait of her as she was, because at the same time she was making herself a shell identical to mine and without knowing it I was copying what she was doing and she without knowing it was copying what I was doing, and all the others were copying all the others, so we would be back where we had been before except for the fact that in saying these shells were the same I was a bit hasty, because when you looked closer you discovered all sorts of little differences that later on might become enormous.

So I can say that my shell made itself, without my taking any special pains to have it come out one way rather than another, but this doesn’t mean that I was absent-minded during that time; I applied myself, instead, to that act of secreting, without allowing myself a moment’s distraction, never thinking of anything else, or rather: thinking always of something else, since I didn’t know how to think of the shell, just as, for that matter, I didn’t know how to think of anything else either, but I accompanied the effort of making the shell with the effort of thinking I was making something, that is anything: that is, I thought of all the things it would be possible to make. So it wasn’t even a monotonous task, because the effort of thinking which accompanied it spread towards countless types of thoughts which spread, each one, towards countless types of actions that might each serve to make countless things, and making each of these things was implicit in making the shell grow, turn after turn …





II




(And so now, after five hundred million years have gone by, I look around and, above the rock, I see the railway embankment and the train passing along it with a party of Dutch girls looking out of the window and, in the last compartment, a solitary traveller reading Herodotus in a bilingual edition, and the train vanishes into the tunnel under the highway, where there is a sign with the Pyramids and the words ‘VISIT EGYPT’, and a little ice-cream van tries to pass a big truck laden with instalments of Rh-Stijl, a periodical encyclopedia that comes out in paperback, but then it puts its brakes on because its visibility is blocked by a cloud of bees which crosses the road coming from a row of hives in a field from which surely a queen bee is flying away, drawing behind her a swarm in the direction opposite to the smoke of the train, which has reappeared at the other end of the tunnel, so you can see hardly anything thanks to the cloudy stream of bees and coal smoke, except a few yards further up there is a peasant breaking the ground with his mattock and, unaware, he brings to light and reburies a fragment of a Neolithic mattock similar to his own, in a garden that surrounds an astronomical observatory with its telescopes aimed at the sky and on whose threshold the keeper’s daughter sits reading the horoscopes in a weekly whose cover displays the face of the star of Cleopatra: I see all this and I feel no amazement because making the shell implied also making the honey in the wax comb and the coal and the telescopes and the reign of Cleopatra and the films about Cleopatra and the Pyramids and the design of the zodiac of the Chaldean astrologers and the wars and empires Herodotus speaks of and the words written by Herodotus and the works written in all languages, including those of Spinoza in Dutch, and the fourteen-line summary of Spinoza’s life and works in the instalment of the encyclopedia in the truck passed by the ice-cream van, and so I feel as if, in making the shell, I had also made the rest.

I look around, and whom am I looking for? She is still the one I seek; I’ve been in love for five hundred million years, and if I see a Dutch girl on the sand with a beachboy wearing a gold chain around his neck and showing her the swarm of bees to frighten her, there she is: I recognize her from her inimitable way of raising one shoulder until it almost touches her cheek, I’m almost sure, or rather I’d say absolutely sure if it weren’t for a certain resemblance that I find also in the daughter of the keeper of the observatory, and in the photograph of the actress made up as Cleopatra, or perhaps in Cleopatra as she really was in person, for that part of the true Cleopatra they say every representation of Cleopatra contains, or in the queen bee flying at the head of the swarm with that forward impetuousness, or in the paper woman cut out and pasted on the plastic windscreen of the little ice-cream van, wearing a bathing suit like the Dutch girl on the beach now listening over a little transistor radio to the voice of a woman singing, the same voice that the encyclopedia truck driver hears over his radio, and the same one I’m now sure I’ve heard for five million years, it is surely she I hear singing and whose image I look for all around, seeing only gulls volplaning on the surface of the sea where a school of anchovies glistens and for a moment I am certain I recognize her in a female gull and a moment later I suspect that instead she’s an anchovy, though she might just as well be any queen or slave-girl named by Herodotus or only hinted at in the pages of the volume left to mark the seat of the reader who has stepped into the corridor of the train to strike up a conversation with the party of Dutch tourists; I might say I am in love with each of those girls and at the same time I am sure of being in love always with her alone.

And the more I torment myself with love for each of them, the less I can bring myself to say to them: ‘Here I am!’, afraid of being mistaken and even more afraid that she is mistaken, taking me for somebody else, for somebody who, for all she knows of me, might easily take my place, for example the beachboy with the gold chain, or the director of the observatory, or a gull, or a male anchovy, or the reader of Herodotus, or Herodotus himself, or the vendor of ice cream, who has come down to the beach along a dusty road among the prickly pears and is now surrounded by the Dutch girls in their bathing suits, or Spinoza, or the truck driver who is transporting the life and works of Spinoza summarized and repeated two thousand times, or one of the drones dying at the bottom of the hive after having fulfilled his role in the continuation of the species.)





III




… Which doesn’t mean that the shell wasn’t, first and foremost, a shell, with its particular form, which couldn’t be any different because it was the very form I had given it, the only one I could or would give it. Since the shell had a form, the form of the world was also changed, in the sense that now it included the form of the world as it had been without a shell plus the form of the shell.

And that had great consequences: because the waving vibrations of light, striking bodies, produce particular effects from them, colour first of all, namely, that matter I used to make stripes with which vibrated in a different way from the rest; but there was also the fact that a volume enters into a special relationship of volumes with other volumes, all phenomena I couldn’t be aware of, though they existed.

The shell in this way was able to create visual images of shells, which are things very similar – as far as we know – to the shell itself, except that the shell is here, whereas the images of it are formed elsewhere, possibly on a retina. An image therefore presupposes a retina, which in turn presupposes a complex system stemming from an encephalon. So, in producing the shell, I also produced its image – not one, of course, but many, because with one shell you can make as many shell-images as you want – but only potential images because to form an image you need all the requisites I mentioned before: an encephalon with its optic ganglia, and an optic nerve to carry the vibrations from outside to inside, and this optic nerve, at the other extremity, ends in something made purposely to see what there is outside, namely the eye. Now it’s ridiculous to think that, having an encephalon, one would simply drop a nerve like a fishing line cast into the darkness; until the eyes crop up, one can’t know whether there is something to be seen outside or not. For myself, I had none of this equipment, so I was the least authorized to speak of it; however, I had conceived an idea of my own, namely that the important thing was to form some visual images, and the eyes would come later in consequence. So I concentrated on making the part of me that was outside (and even the interior part of me that conditioned the exterior) give rise to an image, or rather to what would later be called a lovely image (when compared to other images considered less lovely, or rather ugly, or simply revoltingly hideous).

When a body succeeds in emitting or in reflecting luminous vibrations in a distinct and recognizable order – I thought – what does it do with these vibrations? Put them in its pocket? No, it releases them on the first passer-by. And how will the latter behave in the face of vibrations he can’t utilize and which, taken in this way, might even be annoying? Hide his head in a hole? No, he’ll thrust it out in that direction until the point most exposed to the optic vibrations becomes sensitized and develops the mechanism for exploiting them in the form of images. In short, I conceived of the eye-encephalon link as a kind of tunnel dug from the outside by the force of what was ready to become image, rather than from within by the intention of picking up any old image.

And I wasn’t mistaken: even today I’m sure that the project – in its overall aspect – was right. But my error lay in thinking that sight would also come to us, that is to me and to her. I elaborated a harmonious, coloured image of myself to enter her visual receptivity, to occupy its centre, to settle there, so that she could utilize me constantly, in dreaming and in memory, with thought as well as with sight. And I felt at the same time she was radiating an image of herself so perfect that it would impose itself on my foggy, backward senses, developing in me an interior visual field where it would blaze forth definitely.

So our efforts led us to become those perfect objects of a sense whose nature nobody quite knew yet, and which later became perfect precisely through the perfection of its object, which was, in fact, us. I’m talking about sight, the eyes; only I had failed to foresee one thing: the eyes that finally opened to see us didn’t belong to us but to others.

Shapeless, colourless beings, sacks of guts stuck together carelessly, peopled the world all around us, without giving the slightest thought to what they should make of themselves, to how to express themselves and identify themselves in a stable, complete form, such as to enrich the visual possibilities of whoever saw them. They came and went, sank a while, then emerged, in that space between air and water and rock, wandering about absently; and we in the meanwhile, she and I and all those intent on squeezing out a form of ourselves, were there slaving away at our dark task. Thanks to us, that badly defined space became a visual field; and who reaped the benefit? These intruders, who had never before given a thought to the possibility of eyesight (ugly as they were, they wouldn’t have gained a thing by seeing one another), these creatures who had always turned a deaf ear to the vocation of form. While we were bent over, doing the hardest part of the job, that is creating something to be seen, they were quietly taking on the easiest part: adapting their lazy, embryonic receptive organs to what there was to receive: our images. And they needn’t try telling me now that their job was toilsome too: from that gluey mess that filled their heads anything could have come out, and a photosensitive mechanism doesn’t take all that much trouble to put together. But when it comes to perfecting it, that’s another story! How can you, if you don’t have visible objects to see, gaudy ones even, the kind that impose themselves on the eyesight? To sum it up in a few words: they developed eyes at our expense.

So sight, our sight, which we were obscurely waiting for, was the sight that the others had of us. In one way or another, the great revolution had taken place: all of a sudden, around us, eyes were opening, and corneas and irises and pupils: the swollen, colourless eye of polyps and cuttlefish, the dazed and gelatinous eyes of bream and mullet, the protruding and peduncled eyes of crayfish and lobsters, the bulging and faceted eyes of flies and ants. A seal now comes forward, black and shiny, winking little eyes like pinheads. A snail extends ball-like eyes at the end of long antennae. The inexpressive eyes of the gull examine the surface of the water. Beyond a glass mask the frowning eyes of an underwater fisherman explore the depths. Through the lens of a spyglass a sea captain’s eyes and the eyes of a woman bathing converge on my shell, then look at each other, forgetting me. Framed by far-sighted lenses I feel on me the far-sighted eyes of a zoologist, trying to frame me in the eye of a Rolleiflex. At that moment a school of tiny anchovies, barely born, passes before me, so tiny that in each little white fish it seems there is room only for the eye’s black dot, and it is a kind of eye-dust that crosses the sea.

All these eyes were mine. I had made them possible; I had had the active part; I furnished them the raw material, the image. With eyes had come all the rest, so everything that the others, having eyes, had become, their every form and function, and the quantity of things that, thanks to eyes, they had managed to do, in their every form and function, came from what I had done. Of course, they were not just casually implicit in my being there, in my having relations with others, male and female, et cetera, in my setting out to make a shell, et cetera. In other words, I had foreseen absolutely everything.

And at the bottom of each of those eyes I lived, or rather another me lived, one of the images of me, and it encountered the image of her, the most faithful image of her, in that beyond which opens up, past the semi-liquid sphere of the irises, in the darkness of the pupils, the mirrored hall of the retinas, in our true element which extends without shores, without boundaries.





Time and the Hunter





PART ONE


More of Qfwfq



The Soft Moon




According to the calculations of H. Gerstenkorn, later developed by H. Alfven, the terrestrial continents are simply fragments of the Moon which fell upon our planet. According to this theory, the Moon originally was a planet gravitating around the Sun, until the moment when the nearness of the Earth caused it to be derailed from its orbit. Captured by terrestrial gravity, the Moon moved closer and closer, contracting its orbit around us. At a certain moment the reciprocal attraction began to alter the surface of the two celestial bodies, raising very high waves from which fragments were detached and sent spinning in space, between Earth and Moon, especially fragments of lunar matter which finally fell upon Earth. Later, through the influence of our tides, the Moon was impelled to move away again, until it reached its present orbit. But a part of the lunar mass, perhaps half of it, had remained on Earth, forming the continents.

She was coming closer – Qfwfq recalled – I noticed it as I was going home, raising my eyes between the walls of glass and steel, and I saw her, no longer a light like all the others that shine in the evening: the ones they light on Earth when at a certain hour they pull down a lever at the power station, or those of the sky, further away but similar, or at least not out of harmony with the style of all the rest – I speak in the present tense, but I am still referring to those remote times – I saw her breaking away from all the other lights of the sky and the streets, standing out in the concave map of darkness, no longer occupying a point, perhaps a big one on the order of Mars and Venus, like a hole through which the light spreads, but now becoming an out-and-out portion of space, and she was taking form, not yet clearly identifiable because eyes weren’t used to identifying it, but also because the outlines weren’t sufficiently precise to define a regular figure. Anyway I saw it was becoming a thing.

And it revolted me. Because it was a thing that, though you couldn’t understand what it was made of, or perhaps precisely because you couldn’t understand, seemed different from all the things in our life, our good things of plastic, of nylon, of chrome-plated steel, ducotone, synthetic resins, plexiglass, aluminium, vinyl, formica, zinc, asphalt, asbestos, cement, the old things among which we were born and bred. It was something incompatible, extraneous. I saw it approaching as if it were going to slip between the skyscrapers of Madison Avenue (I’m talking about the avenue we had then, beyond comparison with the Madison of today), in that corridor of night sky glowing with light from above the jagged line of the cornices; and it spread out, imposing on our familiar landscape not only its light of an unsuitable colour, but also its volume, its weight, its incongruous substantiality. And then, all over the face of the Earth – the surfaces of metal plating, iron armatures, rubber pavements, glass domes – over every part of us that was exposed, I felt a shudder pass.

As fast as the traffic allowed, I went through the tunnel, drove towards the Observatory. Sibyl was there, her eye glued to the telescope. As a rule she didn’t like me to visit her during working hours, and the moment she saw me she would make a vexed face; but not that evening: she didn’t even look up, it was obvious she was expecting my visit. ‘Have you seen it?’ would have been a stupid question, but I had to bite my tongue to keep from asking it, I was so impatient to know what she thought about it all.

‘Yes, the planet Moon has come still closer,’ Sibyl said, before I had asked her anything, ‘the phenomenon was foreseen.’

I felt a bit relieved. ‘Do you foresee that it’ll move away again?’ I asked.

Sibyl still had one eyelid half closed, peering into the telescope. ‘No,’ she said, ‘it won’t move away any more.’

I didn’t understand. ‘You mean that the Earth and the Moon have become twin planets?’

‘I mean the Moon isn’t a planet any more and the Earth has a Moon.’

Sibyl had a casual way of dismissing matters; it irritated me every time she did it. ‘What kind of thinking is that?’ I complained. ‘One planet’s just as much a planet as the others, isn’t it?’

‘Would you call this a planet? I mean, a planet the way the Earth’s a planet? Look!’ And Sibyl moved from the telescope, motioning me to approach it. ‘The Moon could never manage to become a planet like ours.’

I wasn’t listening to her explanation: the Moon, enlarged by the telescope, appeared to me in all its details, or rather many of its details appeared to me at once, so mixed up that the more I observed it the less sure I was of how it was made, and I could only vouch for the effect this sight caused in me, an effect of fascinated disgust. First of all, I could note the green veins that ran over it, thicker in certain zones, like a network, but to tell the truth this was the most insignificant detail, the least showy, because what you might call the general properties eluded the grasp of my glance, thanks perhaps to the slightly viscous glistening that transpired from a myriad of pores, one would have said, or opercula, and also in certain points from extended tumefactions of the surface, like buboes or suckers. There, I’m concentrating again on the details, a more picturesque method of description apparently, though in reality of only limited efficiency, because only by considering the details within the whole such as the swelling of the sublunar pulp which stretched its pale external tissues but made them also fold over on themselves in inlets or recesses looking like scars (so it, this Moon, might also have been made of pieces pressed together and stuck on carelessly) – it is, as I say, only by considering the whole, as in diseased viscera, that the single details can also be considered: for example, a thick forest as of black fur which jutted out of a rift.

‘Does it seem right to you that it should go on revolving around the Sun, like us?’ Sibyl said. ‘The Earth is far stronger: in the end it’ll shift the Moon from its orbit and make it turn around the Earth. We’ll have a satellite.’

I was quite careful not to express the anguish I was feeling. I knew how Sibyl reacted in these cases: assuming an attitude of blatant superiority, if not of downright cynicism, acting like a person who is never surprised by anything. She behaved this way to provoke me, I believe (that is, I hope; I would certainly have felt even greater anguish at the thought that she acted out of real indifference).

‘And … and …’ I started to say, taking care to formulate a question that would show nothing but objective curiosity and yet would force Sibyl to say something to appease my anxiety (so I still hoped for this from her, I still insisted that her calm reassure me), ‘… and will we always have it in sight like this?’

‘This is nothing,’ she answered. ‘It’ll come even closer.’ And for the first time, she smiled. ‘Don’t you like it? Why, seeing it there like that, so different, so far from any known form, and knowing that it’s ours, that the Earth has captured it and is keeping it there … I don’t know, I like it, it seems beautiful to me.’

At this point I no longer cared about hiding my mood. ‘But won’t it be dangerous for us?’ I asked.

Sibyl tensed her lips in the expression of hers I liked least. ‘We are on the Earth, the Earth has a force which means it can keep planets around itself, on its own, like the Sun. What can the Moon oppose, in the way of mass, field of gravity, orbit stability, consistency? Surely you don’t mean to compare the two? The Moon is all soft, the Earth is hard, solid, the Earth endures.’

‘What about the Moon? If it doesn’t endure?’

‘Oh, the Earth’s force will keep it in its place.’

I waited till Sibyl had finished her shift at the Observatory, to drive her home. Just outside the city there is that cloverleaf where all the motorways spread out, rushing over bridges that cross one another in spiral patterns, held up by cement pillars of different heights; you never know in what direction you’re going as you follow the white arrows painted on the asphalt, and now and then you find the city you’re leaving suddenly facing you, coming closer, patterned with squares of light among the pillars and the curves of the spiral. There was the Moon just above us: and the city seemed fragile to me, suspended like a cobweb, with all its little tinkling panes, its threadlike embroidery of light, under that excrescence that swelled the sky.

Now, I have used the word ‘excrescence’ to indicate the Moon, but I must at once fall back on the same word to describe the new thing I discovered at that moment: namely, an excrescence emerging from that Moon-excrescence, stretching towards the Earth like the drip of a candle.

‘What’s that? What’s happening?’ I asked, but by now a new curve had set our automobile journeying towards the darkness.

‘It’s the terrestrial attraction causing solid tides on the Moon’s surface,’ Sibyl said. ‘What did I tell you? Call that consistency?’

The unwinding of the motorway brought us again face to face with the Moon, and that candle dripping had stretched still further towards the Earth, curling at its tip like a moustache hair, and then, as its point of attachment thinned to a peduncle, it had almost the appearance of a mushroom.

We lived in a cottage, in a line with others along one of the many avenues of a vast Green Belt. We sat down as always on the rocking chairs on the porch with a view of the backyard, but this time we didn’t look at the half-acre of glazed tiles that formed our share of green space; our eyes were staring above, magnetized by that sort of polyp hanging over us. Because now the Moon’s drippings had become numerous, and they extended towards the Earth like slimy tentacles, and each of them seemed about to start dripping in its turn a matter composed of gelatin and hair and mould and slaver.

‘I ask you, is that any way for a celestial body to disintegrate?’ Sibyl insisted. ‘Now you must realize the superiority of our planet. What if the Moon does come down? Let it come: the time will come also for it to stop. This is the sort of power the Earth’s field of gravity has: after it’s attracted the Moon almost on top of us, all of a sudden it stops the Moon, carries it back to a proper distance, and keeps it there, making it revolve, pressing it into a compact ball. The Moon has us to thank if it doesn’t fall apart completely!’

I found Sibyl’s reasoning convincing, because to me, too, the Moon seemed something inferior and revolting; but her words still couldn’t relieve my apprehension. I saw the lunar outcrops writhing in the sky with sinuous movements, as if they were trying to reach or enfold something: there was the city, below, where we could see a glow of light on the horizon with the jagged shadow of the skyline. Would it stop in time, the Moon, as Sibyl had said, before one of its tentacles had succeeded in clutching the spire of a skyscraper? And what if, sooner, one of these stalactites that kept stretching and lengthening should break off, plunge down upon us?

‘Something may come down,’ Sibyl admitted, without waiting for a question from me, ‘but what does that matter? The Earth is all sheathed in waterproof, crushproof, dirtproof materials; even if a bit of this Moon mush drips on to us, we can clean it up in a hurry.’

As if Sibyl’s assurance had enabled me to see something that had surely been taking place for a while, I cried: ‘Look, stuff is coming down!’ and I raised my arm to point out a suspension of thick drops of a creamy pap in the air. But at that same moment a vibration came from the Earth, a tinkling; and through the sky, in the direction opposite to the falling clumps of planetary secretion, a very minute flight of solid fragments rose, the scales of the Earth’s armour which was being shattered: unbreakable glass and plates of steel and sheaths of non-conducting material, drawn up by the Moon’s attraction as in an eddy of grains of sand.

‘Only minimal damage,’ Sibyl said, ‘and just on the surface. We can repair the gaps in no time. It’s only logical that the capture of a satellite should cost us some losses: but it’s worth it, there’s simply no comparison!’

That was when we heard the first crack of a lunar meteorite falling to the Earth: a very loud ‘splat!’, a deafening noise and, at the same time, a disgustingly spongy one, which didn’t remain alone but was followed by a series of apparently explosive splashes, of flabby whip strokes falling on every side. Before our eyes became accustomed to perceiving what was falling, a little time went by: to tell the truth, I was the slow one because I expected the pieces of the Moon to be luminous too; whereas Sibyl already saw them and commented on them in her contemptuous tone but also with an unusual indulgence: ‘Soft meteorites, now really, who’s ever seen such a thing? Stuff worthy of the Moon … interesting, though, in its way …’

One remained stuck on the wire hedge, half crushed under its weight, spilling over on the ground and immediately mixing with it, and I began to see what it was, that is I began to assemble some sensations that would allow me to form a visual image of what I had before me, and then I became aware of other, smaller spots scattered all over the tile pavement: something like a mud of acid mucus which penetrated into the terrestrial strata, or rather a kind of vegetal parasite that absorbed everything it touched, incorporating it into its own gluey pulp, or else like a serum in which colonies of whirling and ravenous micro-organisms were agglomerated, or else a pancreas cut in pieces trying to join together again, opening like suckers the cells of its cut edges, or else …

I would have liked to close my eyes and I couldn’t; but when I heard Sibyl’s voice say: ‘Of course, I find it revolting too, but when you think that the fact is finally established: the Earth is definitely different and superior and we’re on this side, I believe that for a moment we can even enjoy sinking into it, because anyway afterwards …’ I wheeled around towards her. Her mouth was open in a smile I had never seen before: a damp smile, slightly animal …

The sensation I felt on seeing her like that became confused with the fear caused almost at the same moment by the fall of the great lunar fragment, the one that submerged and destroyed our cottage and the whole avenue and the residential suburb and a great part of the county, in a single, hot, syrupy, stunning blow. After digging through the lunar matter all night, we managed to see the sky again. It was dawn; the storm of meteorites was over; the Earth around us was unrecognizable, covered by a deep layer of mud, a paste of green proliferations and slippery organisms. Of our former terrestrial materials not a trace was visible. The Moon was moving off in the sky, pale, also unrecognizable: narrowing my eyes, I could see it was covered with a thick mass of rubble and shards and fragments, shiny, sharp, clean.

The sequel is familiar. After hundreds of thousands of centuries we are trying to give the Earth its former natural appearance, we are reconstructing the primitive terrestrial crust of plastic and cement and metal and glass and enamel and imitation leather. But what a long way we have to go! For a still incalculable amount of time we will be condemned to sink into the lunar discharge, rotten with chlorophyll and gastric juices and dew and nitrogenous gases and cream and tears. We still have much to do, soldering the shiny and precise plates of the primordial terrestrial sheath until we have erased – or at least concealed – the alien and hostile additions. And with today’s materials, too, concocted haphazardly, products of a corrupt Earth, trying in vain to imitate the prime substances, which cannot be equalled.

The true materials, those of the past, are said to be found now only on the Moon, unexploited and lying there in a mess, and they say that for this reason alone it would be worthwhile going there: to recover them. I don’t like to seem the sort who always says disagreeable things, but we all know what state the Moon is in, exposed to cosmic storms, full of holes, corroded, worn. If we go there, we’ll only have the disappointment of learning that even our material of the old days – the great reason and proof of terrestrial superiority – was inferior goods, not made to last, which can no longer be used even as scrap. There was a time when I would have been careful not to show suspicions of this sort to Sibyl. But now, when she’s fat, dishevelled, lazy, greedily eating cream puffs, what can Sibyl say to me?





The Origin of the Birds




The appearance of Birds comes relatively late, in the history of evolution, following the emergence of all the other classes of the animal kingdom. The progenitor of the Birds – or at least the first whose traces have been found by palaeontologists – is the Archaeopteryx (still endowed with certain characteristics of the Reptiles from which he descends), who dates from the Jurassic period, tens of millions of years after the first Mammals. This is the only exception to the successive appearance of animal groups progressively more developed in the zoological scale.

In those days we weren’t expecting any more surprises – Qfwfq narrated – by then it was clear how things were going to proceed. Those who existed, existed; we had to work things out for ourselves: some would go further, some would remain where they were, and some wouldn’t manage to survive. The choice had to be made from a limited number of possibilities.

But instead, one morning I hear some singing, outside, that I have never heard before. Or rather (since we didn’t yet know what singing was), I hear something making a sound that nobody has ever made before. I look out. I see an unknown animal singing on a branch. He had wings feet tail claws spurs feathers plumes fins quills beak teeth crop horns crest wattles and a star on his forehead. It was a bird; you’ve realized that already, but I didn’t; they had never been seen before. He sang: ‘Koaxpf … Koaxpf … Koaaacch …’, he beat his wings, striped with iridescent colours, he rose in flight, he came to rest a bit further on, resumed his singing.

Now these stories can be told better with strip drawings than with a story composed of sentences one after the other. But to make a cartoon with the bird on the branch and me looking out and all the others with their noses in the air, I would have to remember better how a number of things were made, things I’ve long since forgotten; first the thing I now call bird, second what I now call I, third the branch, fourth the place where I was looking out, fifth all the others. Of these elements I remember only that they were very different from the way we would draw them now. It’s best for you to try on your own to imagine the series of cartoons with all the little figures of the characters in their places, against an effectively outlined background, but you must try at the same time not to imagine the figures, or the background either. Each figure will have its little balloon with the words it says, or with the noises it makes, but there’s no need for you to read everything written there letter for letter, you only need a general idea, according to what I’m going to tell you.

To begin with, you can read a lot of exclamation marks and question marks spurting from our heads, and these mean we were looking at the bird full of amazement – festive amazement, with desire on our part also to sing, to imitate that first warbling, and to jump, to see the bird rise in flight – but also full of consternation, because the existence of birds knocked our traditional way of thinking into a cocked hat.

In the strip that follows, you see the wisest of us all, old U(h), who moves from the group of the others and says: ‘Don’t look at him! He’s a mistake!’ and he holds out his hands as if he wanted to cover the eyes of those present. ‘Now I’ll erase him!’ he says, or thinks, and to depict this desire of his we could have him draw a diagonal line across the frame. The bird flaps his wings, eludes the diagonal, and flies to safety in the opposite corner. U(h) is happy because, with that diagonal line between them, he can’t see the bird any more. The bird pecks at the line, breaks it, and flies at old U(h). Old U(h), to erase him, tries to draw a couple of crossed lines over him. At the point where the two lines meet, the bird alights and lays an egg. Old U(h) pulls the lines from under him, the egg falls, the bird darts off. There is one frame all stained with egg yolk.

I like telling things in cartoon form, but I would have to alternate the action frames with idea frames, and explain for example this stubbornness of U(h)’s in not wanting to admit the existence of the bird. So imagine one of those little frames all filled with writing, which are used to bring you up to date on what went before: After the failure of the Pterosauria, for millions and millions of years all trace of animals with wings had been lost. (‘Except for Insects’, a footnote can clarify.)

The question of winged creatures was considered closed by now. Hadn’t we been told over and over that everything capable of being born from the Reptiles had been born? In the course of millions of years there was no form of living creature that hadn’t had its opportunity to come forth, populate the Earth, and then – in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred – decline and vanish. On this point we were all agreed: the remaining species were the only deserving ones, destined to give life to more and more highly selected progeny, better suited to their surroundings. For some time we had been tormented by doubts as to who was a monster and who wasn’t, but that too could be considered long settled: all of us who existed were non-monsters, while the monsters were all those who could exist and didn’t, because the succession of causes and effects had clearly favoured us, the non-monsters, rather than them.

But if we were going to begin again with strange animals, if the Reptiles, antiquated as they were, started to pull out limbs and teguments they had never felt any need for previously, in other words if a creature impossible by definition such as a bird was instead possible (and what’s more if it could be a handsome bird like this one, pleasing to the sight when he poised on the fern leaves, and to the hearing when he released his warbling), then the barrier between monsters and non-monsters was exploded and everything was possible again.

The bird flew far off. (In the drawing you see a black shadow against the clouds in the sky: not because the bird is black but because that’s the way distant birds are drawn.) And I ran after him. (You see me from behind, as I enter a vast landscape of mountains and forests.) Old U(h) is shouting at me: ‘Come back, Qfwfq!’

I crossed unfamiliar zones. More than once I thought I was lost (in the drawing it only has to be depicted once), but then I would hear a ‘Koaxp …’ and, raising my eyes, I would see the bird perched on a plant, as if he were waiting for me.

Following him like that, I reached a spot where the bushes blocked my view. I opened a path for myself: beneath my feet I saw the void. The Earth ended there; I was balanced on the brink. (The spiral line rising from my head represents my dizziness.) Below, nothing could be seen: a few clouds. And the bird, in that void, went flying off, and every now and then he twisted his neck towards me as if inviting me to follow him. Follow him where, when there was nothing further on?

And then from the white distance a shadow rose, like a horizon of mist, which gradually became clearer, with more distinct outlines. It was a continent, coming forward in the void: you could see its shores, its valleys, its heights, and already the bird was flying above them. But what bird? He was no longer alone, the whole sky over there was a flapping of wings of every colour and every form.

Leaning out from the brink of our Earth, I watched the continent drift towards me. ‘It’s crashing into us!’ I shouted, and at that moment the ground trembled. (A ‘bang!’ written in big letters.) The two worlds, having touched, bounced apart again, then were rejoined, then separated once more. In one of these clashes I found myself flung to the other side, while the empty abyss yawned again and separated me from my world.

I looked around: I didn’t recognize anything. Trees, crystals, animals, grasses – everything was different. Not only did birds inhabit the branches, but so did fish (after a manner of speaking) with spiders’ legs or (you might say) worms with feathers. Now it’s not that I want to describe to you the forms of life over there; imagine them any way you can, more or less strange, it doesn’t much matter. What matters is that around me there were displayed all the forms the world could have taken in its transformations but instead hadn’t taken, for some casual reason or for some basic incompatibility: the rejected forms, unusable, lost.

(To give an idea this strip of drawings should be done in negative: with figures not unlike the others but in white on black; or else upside down – assuming that it can be decided, for any of these figures, which is up and which is down.)

Alarm froze my bones (in the cartoon, drops of cold sweat spurt from my figure) at seeing those images, all of them in some way familiar and all in some way distorted in their proportions or their combinations (my very tiny figure in white, superimposed on the black shadows that occupy the whole frame), but I couldn’t refrain from exploring eagerly all around me. You would have said that my gaze, rather than avoid those monsters, sought them out, as if to be convinced they weren’t monsters entirely, and at a certain point my horror was replaced by a not unpleasant sensation (represented in the drawing by luminous rays crossing the black background): beauty existed even there, if one could recognize it.

This curiosity had led me away from the coast, and I moved among hills that were spiky like enormous sea urchins. By now I was lost in the heart of the unknown continent. (The figure that represents me has become minuscule.) The birds, which a short time before had been for me the strangest of apparitions, were already becoming the most familiar of presences. There were so many that they formed a kind of dome around me, raising and lowering their wings all together (frame crammed with birds; my outline barely glimpsed). Others were resting on the ground, perched on the bushes, and gradually as I advanced they moved. Was I their prisoner? I turned to run off, but I was surrounded by walls of birds who left me no passage, except in one direction. They were driving me where they wanted, all their movements were leading me to one point. What was there, at the end? I could discern only a kind of enormous egg lying on its side, which opened slowly, like a shell.

All of a sudden it was flung open. I smiled. My eyes filled with tears of emotion. (I’m depicted alone, in profile; what I’m looking at remains outside the frame.) Before me there was a creature of a beauty never seen before. A different beauty, which couldn’t be compared to all the forms in which we had recognized beauty (in the frame it is still placed in such a way that only I have it before me, not the reader), and yet ours, the most ours thing of our world (in the frame a symbolical depiction could be used: a feminine hand, or a foot, or a breast, emerging from a great cloak of feathers); without it our world would always have lacked something. I felt I had arrived at the point where everything converged (an eye could be drawn, an eye with long radial lashes which are transformed into a vortex) and where I was about to be swallowed (or a mouth, the parting of two finely drawn lips, tall as I, and me flying, sucked towards the tongue rising from the darkness).

All around me, birds: flapping of beaks, wings that flutter, claws extended, and the cry: ‘Koaxpf … Koaxpf … Koaaacch …’

‘Who are you?’ I asked.

A title explains: Qfwfq before the beautiful Org-Onir-Ornit-Or, and makes my question pointless; the balloon that contains it is covered by another, also rising from my mouth, with the words ‘I love you!’ – an equally superfluous affirmation – promptly followed by another balloon containing the question: ‘Are you a prisoner?’ to which I don’t await an answer, and in a fourth balloon which makes its way among the others I add, ‘I’ll rescue you. Tonight we’ll flee together.’

The following strip is entirely dedicated to the preparations for the flight, to the sleep of the birds and the monsters in a night illuminated by an unknown firmament. A dark little frame, and my voice: ‘Are you following me?’ Or’s voice answered: ‘Yes.’

Here you can imagine for yourselves a series of adventurous strips: Qfwfq and Or in flight across the Continent of the Birds. Alarms, pursuit, dangers: I leave these to you. To tell the story I should somehow describe what Or was like; and I can’t. Imagine a figure somehow towering over mine, but which I somehow hide and protect.

We reached the edge of the chasm. It was dawn. The sun was rising, pale, to reveal our continent now disappearing in the distance. How were we to reach it? I turned towards Or: Or opened her wings. (You hadn’t noticed she had them, in the previous frames: two wings broad as sails.) I clung to her cloak. Or flew.

In the next cartoons Or is seen flying among the clouds, with my head peeping out from her bosom. Then, a triangle of little black triangles in the sky: a swarm of birds pursuing us. We are still in the midst of the void; our continent is approaching, but the swarm is faster. They are birds of prey, with curved beaks, fiery eyes. If Or is quick to reach Earth, we will be among our own kind, before the raptors can attack us. Hurry, Or, a few more flaps of your wings: in the next strip we can reach safety.

Not a chance: now the swarm has surrounded us. Or is flying among the raptors (a little white triangle drawn in another triangle full of little black triangles). We are flying over my village: Or would have only to fold her wings and let herself drop, and we would be free. But Or continues flying high, along with the birds. I shouted: ‘Or, move lower!’ She opened her cloak and let me fall. (‘Plop!’) The swarm, with Or in their midst, turns in the sky, goes back, becomes tiny on the horizon. I find myself flat on the ground, alone.

(Title: During Qfwfq’s absence, many changes had taken place.) Since the existence of birds had been discovered, the ideas that governed our world had come to a crisis. What everyone had thought he understood before, the simple and regular way in which things were as they were, was no longer valid; in other words: this was nothing but one of the countless possibilities; nobody excluded the possibility that things could proceed in other, entirely different ways. You would have said that now each individual was ashamed of being the way he was expected to be, and was making an effort to show some irregular, unforeseen aspect: a slightly more birdlike aspect, or if not exactly birdlike, at least sufficiently so to keep him from looking out of place alongside the strangeness of the birds. I no longer recognized my neighbours. Not that they were much changed: but those who had some inexplicable characteristic which they had formerly tried to conceal now put it on display. And they all looked as if they were expecting something any moment: not the punctual succession of causes and effects as in the past, but the unexpected.

I couldn’t get my bearings. The others thought I had stuck to the old ideas, to the time before the birds; they didn’t understand that to me their birdish whims were only laughable: I had seen much more than that, I had visited the world of the things that could have been, and I couldn’t drive it from my mind. And I had known the beauty kept prisoner in the heart of that world, the beauty lost for me and for all of us, and I had fallen in love with it.

I spent my days on the top of a mountain, gazing at the sky in case a bird flew across it. And on the peak of another mountain nearby there was old U(h), also looking at the sky. Old U(h) was still considered the wisest of us all, but his attitude towards the birds had changed. He believed the birds were no longer a mistake, but the truth, the only truth of the world. He had taken to interpreting the birds’ flight, trying to read the future in it.

‘Seen anything?’ he shouted to me, from his mountain.

‘Nothing in sight,’ I said.

‘There’s one!’ we would shout at times, he or I.

‘Where was it coming from? I didn’t have time to see from what part of the sky it appeared. Tell me: where from?’ he asked, all breathless. U(h) drew his auguries from the source of the flight.

Or else it was I who asked: ‘What direction was it flying in? I didn’t see it! Did it vanish over here or over there?’ because I hoped the birds would show me the way to reach Or.

There’s no use my telling you in detail the cunning I used to succeed in returning to the Continent of the Birds. In the strips it would be told with one of those tricks that work well only in drawings. (The frame is empty. I arrive. I spread paste on the upper right-hand corner. I sit down in the lower left-hand corner. A bird enters, flying, from the left, at the top. As he leaves the frame, his tail becomes stuck. He keeps flying and pulls after him the whole frame stuck to his tail, with me sitting at the bottom, allowing myself to be carried along. Thus I arrive at the Land of the Birds. If you don’t like this story you can think up another one: the important thing is to have me arrive there.)

I arrived and I felt my arms and legs clutched. I was surrounded by birds; one had perched on my head, one was pecking at my neck. ‘Qfwfq, you’re under arrest! We’ve caught you, at last!’ I was shut up in a cell.

‘Will they kill me?’ I asked the jailer bird.

‘Tomorrow you’ll be tried and then you’ll know,’ he said, perched on the bars.

‘Who’s going to judge me?’

‘The Queen of the Birds.’

The next day I was led into the throne room. But I had seen before that enormous shell-egg that was opening. I started.

‘Then you’re not a prisoner of the birds!’ I exclaimed.

A beak dug into my neck. ‘Bow down before Queen Org-Onir-Ornit-Or!’

Or made a sign. All the birds stopped. (In the drawing you see a slender, beringed hand which rises from an arrangement of feathers.)

‘Marry me and you’ll be safe,’ Or said.

Our wedding was celebrated. I can’t tell you anything about this either: the only thing that’s remained in my memory is a feathery flutter of iridescent images. Perhaps I was paying for my happiness by renouncing any understanding of what I was living through.

I asked Or.

‘I would like to understand.’

‘What?’

‘Everything, all this.’ I gestured towards my surroundings.

‘You’ll understand when you’ve forgotten what you understood before.’

Night fell. The shell-egg served both as throne and as nuptial bed.

‘Have you forgotten?’

‘Yes. What? I don’t know what, I don’t remember anything.’

(Frame of Qfwfq’s thoughts: No, I still remember, I’m about to forget everything, but I’m forcing myself to remember!)

‘Come.’

We lay down together.

(Frame of Qfwfq’s thoughts: I’m forgetting … It’s beautiful to forget … No, I want to remember … I want to forget and remember at the same time … Just another second and I feel I’ll have forgotten … Wait … Oh! An explosion marked with the word ‘Flash!’ or else ‘Eureka!’ in capital letters.)

For a fraction of a second between the loss of everything I knew before and the gain of everything I would know afterwards, I managed to embrace in a single thought the world of things as they were and of things as they could have been, and I realized that a single system included all. The world of birds, of monsters, of Or’s beauty was the same as the one where I had always lived, which none of us had understood wholly.

‘Or! I understand! You! How beautiful! Hurrah!’ I exclaimed and I sat up in the bed.

My bride let out a cry.

‘Now I’ll explain it to you!’ I said, exultant. ‘Now I’ll explain everything to everyone!’

‘Be quiet!’ Or shouted. ‘You must be quiet!’

‘The world is single and what exists can’t be explained without …’ I proclaimed. Now she was over me, she was trying to suffocate me (in the drawing: a breast crushing me): ‘Be quiet! Be quiet!’

Hundreds of beaks and claws were tearing the canopy of the nuptial bed. The birds fell upon me, but beyond their wings I could recognize my native landscape, which was becoming fused with the alien continent.

‘There’s no difference. Monsters and non-monsters have always been close to one another! What hasn’t been continues to be …’ – I was speaking not only to the birds and the monsters but also to those I had always known, who were rushing in on every side.

‘Qfwfq! You’ve lost me! Birds! He’s yours!’ and the Queen pushed me away.

Too late, I realized how the birds’ beaks were intent on separating the two worlds that my revelation had united. ‘No, wait, don’t move away, the two of us together, Or … where are you?’ I was rolling in the void among scraps of paper and feathers.

(The birds, with beaks and claws, tear up the page of strips. Each flies off with a scrap of printed paper in his beak. The page below is also covered with strip drawings; it depicts the world as it was before the birds’ appearance and its successive, predictable developments. I’m among the others, with a bewildered look. In the sky there are still birds, but nobody pays attention to them any more.)

Of what I understood then, I’ve now forgotten everything. What I’ve told you is all I can reconstruct, with the help of conjectures in the episodes with the most gaps. I have never stopped hoping that the birds might one day take me back to Queen Or. But are they real birds, these ones that have remained in our midst? The more I observe them, the less they suggest what I would like to remember. (The last strip is all photographs: a bird, the same bird in close-up, the head of the bird enlarged, a detail of the head, the eye …)





Crystals




If the substances that made up the terrestrial globe in its incandescent state had had at their disposal a period of time long enough to allow them to grow cold and also sufficient freedom of movement, each of them would have become separated from the others in a single, enormous crystal.

It could have been different, I know – Qfwfq remarked – you’re telling me: I believed so firmly in that world of crystal that was supposed to come forth that I can’t resign myself to living still in this world, amorphous and crumbling and gummy, which has been our lot, instead. I run all the time like everybody else, I take the train each morning (I live in New Jersey) to slip into the cluster of prisms I see emerging beyond the Hudson, with its sharp cusps; I spend my days there, going up and down the horizontal and vertical axes that criss-cross that compact solid, or along the obligatory routes that graze its sides and its edges. But I don’t fall into the trap: I know they’re making me run among smooth transparent walls and between symmetrical angles so I’ll believe I’m inside a crystal, so I’ll recognize a regular form there, a rotation axis, a constant in the dihedrons, whereas none of all this exists. The contrary exists: glass, those are glass solids that flank the streets, not crystal, it’s a paste of haphazard molecules which has invaded and cemented the world, a layer of suddenly chilled lava, stiffened into forms imposed from the outside, whereas inside it’s magma just as in the Earth’s incandescent days.

I don’t pine for them surely, those days: I feel discontented with things as they are, but if, for that reason, you expect me to remember the past with nostalgia, you’re mistaken. It was horrible, the Earth without any crust, an eternal incandescent winter, a mineral bog, with black swirls of iron and nickel that dripped down from every crack towards the centre of the globe, and jets of mercury that gushed up in high spurts. We made our way through a boiling haze, Vug and I, and we could never manage to touch a solid point. A barrier of liquid rocks that we found before us would suddenly evaporate in our path, disintegrating into an acid cloud; we would rush to pass it, but already we could feel it condensing and striking us like a storm of metallic rain, swelling the thick waves of an aluminium ocean. The substance of things changed around us every minute; the atoms, that is, passed from one state of disorder to another state of disorder and then another still: or rather, practically speaking, everything remained always the same. The only real change would have been the atoms’ arranging themselves in some sort of order: this is what Vug and I were looking for, moving in the mixture of the elements without any points of reference, without a before or an after.

Now the situation is different, I admit: I have a wristwatch, I compare the angle of its hands with the angle of all the hands I see; I have an engagement book where the hours of my business appointments are marked down; I have a chequebook on whose stubs I add and subtract numbers. At Penn Station I get off the train, I take the subway, I stand and grasp the strap with one hand to keep my balance while I hold my newspaper up in the other, folded so I can glance over the figures of the stock market quotations: I play the game, in other words, the game of pretending there’s an order in the dust, a regularity in the system, or an interpenetration of different systems, incongruous but still measurable, so that every graininess of disorder coincides with the faceting of an order which promptly crumbles.

Before it was worse, of course. The world was a solution of substances where everything was dissolved into everything and the solvent of everything. Vug and I kept on getting lost in its midst, losing our lost places, where we had been lost always, without any idea of what we could have found (or of what could have found us) so as to be lost no more.

We realized it all of a sudden. Vug said: ‘There!’

She was pointing, in the midst of a lava flow, at something that was taking form. It was a solid with regular, smooth facets and sharp corners; and these facets and corners were slowly expanding, as if at the expense of the surrounding matter, and also the form of the solid was changing, while still maintaining symmetrical proportions … And it wasn’t only the form that was distinct from all the rest: it was also the way the light entered inside, passing through it and refracted by it. Vug said: ‘They shine! Lots of them!’

It wasn’t the only one, in fact. On the incandescent expanse where once only ephemeral gas bubbles had risen, expelled from the Earth’s bowels, cubes now were coming to the surface and octahedrons, prisms, figures so transparent they seemed airy, empty inside, but instead, as we soon saw, they concentrated in themselves an incredible compactness and hardness. The sparkle of this angled blossoming was invading the Earth, and Vug said: ‘It’s spring!’ I kissed her.

Now you can understand me: if I love order, it’s not – as with so many others – the mark of a character subjected to an inner discipline, a repression of the instincts. In me the idea of an absolutely regular world, symmetrical and methodical, is associated with that first impulse and burgeoning of nature, that amorous tension – what you call eros – while all the rest of your images, those that according to you associate passion with disorder, love with intemperate overflow – river fire whirlpool volcano – for me are memories of nothingness and listlessness and boredom.

It was a mistake on my part, it didn’t take me long to understand that. Here we are at the point of arrival: Vug is lost; of the diamond eros only dust remains; the simulated crystal that imprisons me now is base glass. I follow the arrows on the asphalt, I line up at the traffic light, and I start again (today I came into New York by car) when the green comes on (as I do every Wednesday because I take) shifting into first (Dorothy to her psychoanalyst), I try to maintain a steady speed which allows me to pass all the green lights on Second Avenue. This, which you call order, is a threadbare patch over disintegration; I found a parking space but in two hours I’ll have to go down again to put another coin in the meter; if I forget they’ll tow my car away.

I dreamed of a world of crystal, in those days: I didn’t dream it, I saw it, an indestructible frozen springtime of quartz. Polyhedrons grew up, tall as mountains, diaphanous: the shadow of the person beyond pierced through their thickness. ‘Vug, it’s you!’ To reach her I flung myself against walls smooth as mirrors; I slipped back; I clutched the edges, wounding myself; I ran along treacherous perimeters, and at every turn there was a different light – diffused, milky, opaque – that the mountain contained.

‘Where are you?’

‘In the woods!’

The silver crystals were filiform trees, with branches at every right angle. Skeletal fronds of tin and of lead thickened the forest in a geometric vegetation.

In the middle there was Vug, running. ‘Qfwfq! It’s different over there!’ she cried. ‘Gold, green, blue!’

A valley of beryllium opened out, surrounded by ridges of every colour, from aquamarine to emerald. I followed Vug with my spirit torn between happiness and fear: happiness at seeing how every substance that made up the world was finding its definitive and solid form, and a still vague fear that this triumph of order in such various fashions might reproduce on another scale the disorder we had barely left behind us. A total crystal I dreamed, a topaz world that would leave out nothing: I was impatient for our Earth to detach itself from the wheel of gas and dust in which all the celestial bodies were whirling, ours should be the first to escape that useless dispersal which is the universe.

Of course, if he chooses, a person can also take it into his head to find an order in the stars, the galaxies, an order in the lighted windows of the empty skyscrapers where between nine and midnight the cleaning women wax the floors of the offices. Rationalize, that’s the big task: rationalize if you don’t want everything to come apart. Tonight we’re dining in town, in a restaurant on the terrace of a twenty-fourth floor. It’s a business dinner: there are six of us; there is also Dorothy, and the wife of Dick Bemberg. I eat some oysters, I look at a star that’s called (if I have the right one) Betelgeuse. We make conversation: we husbands talk about production; the ladies, about consumption. Anyway, seeing the firmament is difficult: the lights of Manhattan spread out a halo that becomes mixed with the luminosity of the sky.

The wonder of crystals is the network of atoms that is constantly repeated: this is what Vug wouldn’t understand. What she liked – I quickly realized – was to discover in crystals some differences, even minimal ones, irregularities, flaws.

‘But what does one atom out of place matter to you, an exfoliation that’s a bit crooked,’ I said, ‘in a solid that’s destined to be enlarged infinitely according to a regular pattern? It’s the single crystal we’re working towards, the gigantic crystal …’

‘I like them when there’re lots of little ones,’ she said. To contradict me, surely; but also because it was true that crystals were popping up by the thousands at the same time and were interpenetrating one another, arresting their growth where they came in contact, and they never succeeded in taking over entirely the liquid rock from which they received their form: the world wasn’t tending to be composed into an ever-simpler figure but was clotting in a vitreous mass from which prisms and octahedrons and cubes seemed to be struggling to be free, to draw all the matter to themselves …

A crater exploded: a cascade of diamonds spread out.

‘Look! Aren’t they big?’ Vug exclaimed.

On every side there were erupting volcanoes: a continent of diamond refracted the Sun’s light in a mosaic of rainbow chips.

‘Didn’t you say the smaller they are the more you like them?’ I reminded her.

‘No! Those enormous ones – I want them!’ and she darted off.

‘There are still bigger ones,’ I said, pointing above us. The sparkle was blinding: I could already see a mountain-diamond, a faceted and iridescent chain, a gem-plateau, a Koh-i-noor-Himalaya.

‘What can I do with them? I like the ones that can be picked up. I want to have them!’ and in Vug there was already the frenzy of possession.

The Complete Cosmicomics

‘The diamond will have us, instead. It’s the stronger,’ I said.

I was mistaken, as usual: the diamond was had, not by us. When I walk past Tiffany’s, I stop to look at the windows, I contemplate the diamond prisoners, shards of our lost kingdom. They lie in velvet coffins, chained with silver and platinum; with my imagination and my memory I enlarge them, I give them again the gigantic dimensions of fortress, garden, lake, I imagine Vug’s pale blue shadow mirrored there. I’m not imagining it: it really is Vug who now advances among the diamonds. I turn: it’s the girl looking into the window over my shoulder, from beneath the hair falling across her forehead.

‘Vug!’ I say. ‘Our diamonds!’

She laughs.

‘Is it really you?’ I ask. ‘What’s your name?’

She gives me her telephone number.

We are among slabs of glass: I live in simulated order, I would like to say to her, I have an office on the East Side, I live in New Jersey, for the weekend Dorothy has invited the Bembergs, against simulated order simulated disorder is impotent, the diamond would be necessary, not for us to possess it but for it to possess us, the free diamond in which Vug and I were free …

‘I’ll call you,’ I say to her, only out of the desire to resume my arguing with her.

In an aluminium crystal, where chance scatters some chrome atoms, the transparency is coloured a dark red: so the rubies flowered beneath our footsteps.

‘You see?’ Vug said. ‘Aren’t they beautiful?’

We couldn’t walk through a valley of rubies without starting to quarrel again.

‘Yes,’ I said, ‘because the regularity of the hexagon …’

‘Uff!’ she said. ‘Would they be rubies without the intrusion of extraneous atoms? Answer me that!’

I became angry. More beautiful? Or less beautiful? We could go on arguing to infinity, but the only sure fact was that the Earth was moving in the direction of Vug’s preferences. Vug’s world was in the fissures, the cracks where lava rises, dissolving the rock and mixing the minerals in unpredictable concretions. Seeing her caress walls of granite, I regretted what had been lost in that rock, the exactness of the feldspars, the micas, the quartzes. Vug seemed to take pleasure only in noting how minutely variegated the face of the world appeared. How could we understand each other? For me all that mattered was homogeneous growth, indiscerptibility, achieved serenity; for her, everything had to be separation and mixture, one or the other, or both at once. Even the two of us had to take on an aspect (we still possessed neither form nor future): I imagined a slow uniform expansion, following the crystals’ example, until the me-crystal would have interpenetrated and fused with the her-crystal and perhaps together we would have become a unity within the world-crystal; she already seemed to know that the law of living matter would be infinite separating and rejoining. Was it Vug, then, who was right?

It’s Monday; I telephone her. It’s almost summer already. We spend a day together, on Staten Island, lying on the beach. Vug watches the grains of sand trickle through her fingers.

‘All these tiny crystals …’ she says.

The shattered world that surrounds us is, for her, still the world of the past, the one we expected to be born from the incandescent world. To be sure, the crystals still give the world form, breaking up, being reduced to almost imperceptible fragments rolled by the waves, encrusted with all the elements dissolved in the sea which kneads them together again in steep cliffs, in sandstone reefs, a hundred times dissolved and recomposed, in schists, slates, marbles of glabrous whiteness, simulacra of what they once could have been and now can never be.

And again I am gripped by my stubbornness as I was when it began to be clear that the game was lost, that the Earth’s crust was becoming a congeries of disparate forms, and I didn’t want to resign myself, and at every irregularity in the porphyry that Vug happily pointed out to me, at every vitrescence that emerged from the basalt, I wanted to persuade myself that these were only apparent flaws, that they were all part of a much vaster regular structure, in which every asymmetry we thought we observed really corresponded to a network of symmetries so complicated we couldn’t comprehend it, and I tried to calculate how many billions of sides and dihedral corners this labyrinthine crystal must have, this hypercrystal that included within itself crystals and non-crystals.

Vug has brought a little transistor radio along to the beach with her.

‘Everything comes from crystal,’ I say, ‘even the music we’re hearing.’ But I know full well that the transistor’s crystal is imperfect, flawed, veined with impurities, with rents in the warp of the atoms.

She says: ‘It’s an obsession with you.’ And it is our old quarrel, continuing. She wants to make me admit that real order carries impurity within itself, destruction.

The boat lands at the Battery, it is evening; in the illuminated network of the skyscraper-prisms I now look only at the dark rips, the gaps. I see Vug home; I go up with her. She lives downtown, she has a photography studio. As I look around I see nothing but perturbations of the order of the atoms: luminescent tubes, TV, the condensing of tiny silver crystals on the photographic plates. I open the icebox, I take out the ice for our whisky. From the transistor comes the sound of a saxophone. The crystal which has succeeded in becoming the world, in making the world transparent to itself, in refracting it into infinite spectral images, is not mine: it is a corroded crystal, stained, mixed. The victory of the crystals (and of Vug) has been the same thing as their defeat (and mine). I’ll wait now till the Thelonious Monk record ends, then I’ll tell her.





Blood, Sea




The conditions that obtained when life had not yet emerged from the oceans have not subsequently changed a great deal for the cells of the human body, bathed by the primordial wave which continues to flow in the arteries. Our blood in fact has a chemical composition analogous to that of the sea of our origins, from which the first living cells and the first multicellular beings derived the oxygen and the other elements necessary to life. With the evolution of more complex organisms, the problem of maintaining a maximum number of cells in contact with the liquid environment could not be solved simply by the expansion of the exterior surface: those organisms endowed with hollow structures, into which the sea water could flow, found themselves at an advantage. But it was only with the ramification of these cavities into a system of blood circulation that distribution of oxygen was guaranteed to the complex of cells, thus making terrestrial life possible. The sea where living creatures were at one time immersed is now enclosed within their bodies.

Basically not much has changed: I swim, I continue swimming in the same warm sea – Qfwfq said – or rather, the inside isn’t changed, what was formerly the outside, where I used to swim under the Sun, and where I now swim in darkness, is inside; what’s changed is the outside, the present outside, which was the inside before, that’s changed all right; however, it doesn’t matter very much. I say it doesn’t matter very much and you promptly reply: What do you mean, the outside doesn’t matter much? What I mean is that if you look at it more closely, from the point of view of the old outside, that is from the present inside, what is the present outside? It’s simply where it’s dry, where there is no flux or reflux, and as far as mattering goes, of course, that matters too, in as much as it’s the outside, since it’s been on the outside, since that outside has been outside, and people believe it’s more deserving of consideration than the inside. When all is said and done, however, even when it was inside it mattered, though in a more restricted range or so it seemed then. This is what I mean: less deserving of consideration. Well, let’s start talking right now about the others, those who are not I, our neighbour: we know our neighbour exists because he’s outside, agreed? Outside like the present outside. But before, when the outside was what we swam in, the very dense and very warm ocean, even then there were the others, slippery things, in that old outside, which is like the present inside, and so it is now when I’ve changed places and given the wheel to Signor Cècere, at the Codogno service station, and in front, next to him, Jenny Fumagalli has taken the passenger’s seat, and I’ve moved into the back with Zylphia: the outside, what is the outside? A dry environment, lacking in meaning, a bit crammed (there are four of us in a Volkswagen), where all is indifferent and interchangeable, Jenny Fumagalli, Codogno, Signor Cécere, the service station, and as far as Zylphia is concerned, at the moment when I placed my hand on her knee, at perhaps ten miles from Casalpuster-lengo, or else she was the one who started touching me, I don’t remember, since outside events tend to be confused, what I felt, I mean the sensation that came from outside, was really a weak business compared to what went through my blood and to what I have felt ever since then, since the time when we were swimming together in the same torrid, blazing ocean, Zylphia and I.

The underwater depths were red like the colour we see now only inside our eyelids, and the Sun’s rays penetrated to brighten them in flashes or else in sprays. We undulated with no sense of direction, drawn by an obscure current so light that it seemed downright impalpable and yet strong enough to drag us up in very high waves and down in their troughs. Zylphia would plunge headlong beneath me in a violet, almost black whirlpool, then soar over me rising towards the more scarlet stripes that ran beneath the luminous vault. We felt all this through the layers of our former surface dilated to maintain the most extended possible contact with that nourishing sea, because at every up and down of the waves there was stuff that passed from outside of us to our inside, all sustenance of every sort, even iron, healthful stuff, in short, and in fact I’ve never been so well as I was then. Or, to be more precise: I was well since in dilating my surface I increased the possibilities of contact between me and this outside of me that was so precious, but as the zones of my body soaked in marine solution were extended, my volume also increased at the same time, and a more and more voluminous zone within me became unreachable by the element outside, it became arid, dull, and the weight of this dry and torpid thickness I carried within me was the only shadow on my happiness, our happiness, Zylphia’s and mine, because the more she splendidly took up space in the sea, the more the inert and opaque thickness grew in her too, unlaved and unlavable, lost to the vital flux, not reached by the messages I transmitted to her through the vibration of the waves. So perhaps I could say I’m better off now than I was then, now that the layers of our former surface, then stretched on the outside, have been turned inside out like a glove, now that all the outside has been turned inwards and has entered and pervaded us through filiform ramifications, yes, I could really say this, were it not for the fact that the dull arid zone has been projected outwards, has expanded to the extent of the distance between my tweed suit and the fleeting landscape of the Lodi plain, and it surrounds me, swollen with undesired presences such as Signor Cècere’s, with all the thickness that Signor Cècere, formerly, would have enclosed within himself – in his foolish manner of dilating uniformly like a ball – now unfolded before me in a surface unsuitably irregular and detailed, especially in his pudgy neck dotted with pimples, taut in his half-starched collar at this moment when he is saying: ‘Oh, you two on the back seat!’ and he has slightly shifted the rear-view mirror and has certainly glimpsed what our hands are doing, mine and Zylphia’s, our diminutive outside hands, our diminutively sensitive hands that pursue the memory of ourselves swimming, or rather our swimming memory, or rather the presence of what in me and Zylphia continues swimming or being swum, together, as then.

This is a distinction I might bring up to give a clearer idea of before and now: before, we swam, and now we are swum. But on sober reflection I prefer not to go into this, because in reality even when the sea was outside I swam in it the same way I do now, without any intervention of my will, that is to say I was swum even then, no more nor less than now, there was a current that enfolded me and carried me this way and that, a gentle and soft fluid, in which Zylphia and I wallowed, turning on ourselves, hovering over abysses of ruby-coloured transparence, hiding among turquoise-coloured filaments that wriggled up from the depths; but these sensations of movement – wait and I’ll explain it to you – were due only to what? They were due to a kind of general pulsation, no, I don’t want to confuse things with the way they are now, because since we’ve been keeping the sea closed inside us it’s natural that in moving it should make this piston effect, but in those days you certainly couldn’t have talked about pistons, because you would have had to imagine a piston without walls, a combustion chamber of infinite volume as the sea appeared infinite to us, or rather the ocean, in which we were immersed, whereas now everything is pulsation and beating and rumble and crackling, inside the arteries and outside, the sea within the arteries that accelerates its course as soon as I feel Zylphia’s hand seeking mine, or rather, as soon as I feel the acceleration in the course of Zylphia’s arteries as she feels my hand seeking hers (the two flows which are still the same flow of a same sea and which are joined beyond the contact of the thirsty fingertips); and also outside, the opaque thirsty outside that seeks dully to imitate the beat and rumble and crackling of inside, and vibrates in the accelerator under Signor Cècere’s foot, and the whole line of cars stopped at the exit from the motorway tries to repeat the pulsing of the ocean now buried inside us, of the red ocean that was once without shores, under the Sun.

It is a false sense of movement that this now-motionless line of spluttering cars transmits; then it moves and it’s as if it were still, the movement is false, it merely repeats signs and white stripes and roadbeds; and the whole journey has been nothing but false movement in the immobility and indifference of everything that is outside. Only the sea moved and moves, outside or inside, only in that movement did Zylphia and I become aware of each other’s presence, even if then we didn’t so much as graze each other, even if I was undulating in this direction and she in that, but the sea had only to quicken its rhythm and I became aware of Zylphia’s presence, her presence which was different, for example, from Signor Cècere, who was however also around even then and I could sense him as I felt an acceleration of the same sort as that other one but with a negative charge, that is the acceleration of the sea (and now of the blood) with regard to Zylphia was (is) like swimming towards each other, or else like swimming and chasing each other in play, while the acceleration (of the sea and now of the blood) with regard to Signor Cècere was (is) like a swimming away to avoid him, or else like swimming towards him to make him go away, all of this involving no change in the relationship of our respective distances.

Now it is Signor Cècere who accelerates (the words used are the same but the meanings change) and passes an Alfa Romeo in a curve, and it is with regard to Zylphia that he accelerates, to distract her with a risky manoeuvre, a false risky manoeuvre, from the swimming that unites her and me: false, I say, as a manoeuvre, not as a risk because the risk may well be real, that is to our inside which in a crash could spurt outside; whereas the manoeuvre in itself changes nothing at all, the distances between Alfa, curve, Volkswagen can assume different values and relationships but nothing essential happens, as nothing essential happens in Zylphia, who doesn’t care a bit about Signor Cècere’s driving, at most it is Jenny Fumagalli who exults: ‘My, isn’t this car fast?’ and her exultation, in the presumption that Signor Cècere’s bold driving is for her benefit, is doubly unjustified, first because her inside transmits nothing to her that justifies exultation, and secondly because she is mistaken about Signor Cècere’s intentions as he in turn is mistaken, believing he is achieving God knows what with his showing off, just as she, Jenny Fumagalli, was mistaken before about my intentions, when I was at the wheel and she at my side, and there in the back next to Zylphia Signor Cècere, too, was mistaken, both concentrating – he and Jenny – on the reverse arrangement of dry layers of surface, unaware – dilated into balls as they were – that the only real things that happen are those that happen in the swimming of our immersed parts; and so this silly business of passing Alfas meaning nothing, like a passing of fixed, immobile, nailed-down objects, continues to be superimposed on the story of our free and real swimming, continues to seek meaning by interfering with it, in the only silly way it knows, in this story of the risk of blood, of the possibility of our blood returning to a sea of blood, of a false return to a sea of blood which would no longer be blood or sea.

Here I must hasten to make clear – before by another idiotic passing of a trailer truck Signor Cècere makes all clarification pointless – the way that the common blood-sea of the past was common and at the same time individual to each of us and how we can continue swimming in it as such and how we can’t: I don’t know if I can make this sort of explanation in a hurry because, as always, when this general substance is discussed, the talk can’t be in general terms but has to vary according to the relationship between one individual and the others, so it amounts practically to beginning all over again at the beginning. Now then: this business of having the vital element in common was a beautiful thing in as much as the separation between me and Zylphia was so to speak overcome and we could feel ourselves at the same time two distinct individuals and a single whole, which always has its advantages, but when you realize that this single whole also included absolutely insipid presences such as Jenny Fumagalli, or worse, unbearable ones such as Signor Cècere, then thanks all the same, the thing loses much of its interest. This is the point where the reproductive instinct comes into play: we had a great desire, Zylphia and I, or at least I had a great desire, and I think she must have had it too, since she was willing, to multiply our presence in the sea-blood so that there would be more and more of us to profit from it and less and less of Signor Cècere, and as we had our reproductive cells all ready for that very purpose, we fell to fertilizing with a will, that is to say I fertilized everything of hers that was fertilizable, so that our presence would increase in both absolute number and in percentage, and Signor Cècere – though he too made feverish clumsy efforts at reproducing himself – would remain in a minority – this was the dream, the virtual obsession that gripped me – a minority that would become smaller and smaller, insignificant, zero point zero zero et cetera per cent, until he vanished into the dense cloud of our progeny as in a school of rapid and ravenous anchovies who would devour him bit by bit, burying him inside our dry inner layers, bit by bit, where the sea’s flow would never reach him again, and then the sea-blood would have become one with us, that is, all blood would finally be our blood.

This is in fact the secret desire I feel, looking at the stiff collar of Signor Cécere up front: make him disappear, eat him up, I mean: not eat him up myself, because he turns my stomach slightly (in view of the pimples), but emit, project, outside myself (outside the Zylphia-me unit), a school of ravenous anchovies (of me-sardines, of Zylphia-sardines) to devour Signor Cécere, deprive him of the use of a circulatory system (as well as of a combustion engine, as well as the illusory use of an engine foolishly combustive), and while we’re at it, devour also that pain in the neck Fumagalli, who because of the simple fact that I sat next to her before has got it into her head that I flirted with her somehow, when I wasn’t paying the slightest attention to her, and now she says in that whiny little voice of hers: ‘Watch out, Zylphia’ ( just to cause trouble), ‘I know that gentleman back there …’ just to suggest I behaved with her before as I’m behaving now with Zylphia, but what can la Fumagalli know about what is really happening between me and Zylphia, about how Zylphia and I are continuing our ancient swim through the scarlet depths?

I’ll go back to what I was saying earlier, because I have the impression things have become a bit confused: to devour Signor Cècere, to ingurgitate him was the best way to separate him from the blood-sea when the blood was in fact the sea, when our present inside was outside and our outside, inside; but now, in reality, my secret desire is to make Signor Cècere become pure outside, deprive him of the inside he illicitly enjoys, make him expel the lost sea within his pleonastic person; in short, my dream is to eject against him not so much a swarm of me-anchovies as a hail of me-projectiles, rat-tat-tat to riddle him from head to foot, making him spurt his black blood to the last drop, and this idea is linked also to the idea of reproducing myself with Zylphia, of multiplying with her our blood circulation in a platoon or battalion of vindictive descendants armed with automatic rifles to riddle Signor Cècere, this in fact now prompts my sanguinary instinct (in all secrecy, given my constant mien as a civil, polite person just like the rest of you), the sanguinary instinct connected to the meaning of blood as ‘our blood’ which I bear in me just as you do, civilly and politely.

Thus far everything may seem clear: however, you must bear in mind that to make it clear I have so simplified things that I’m not sure whether the step forward I’ve made is really a step forward. Because from the moment when blood becomes ‘our blood’, the relationship between us and blood changes, that is, what counts is the blood in so far as it is ‘ours’, and all the rest, us included, counts less. So there was in my impulse towards Zylphia, not only the drive to have all the ocean for us, but also the drive to lose it, the ocean, to annihilate ourselves in the ocean, to destroy ourselves, to torment ourselves, or rather – as a beginning – to torment her, Zylphia my beloved, to tear her to pieces, to eat her up. And with her it’s the same: what she wanted was to torment me, devour me, swallow me, nothing but that. The orange stain of the Sun seen from the water’s depths swayed like a medusa, and Zylphia darted among the luminous filaments devoured by the desire to devour me, and I writhed in the tangles of darkness that rose from the depths like long strands of seaweed beringed with indigo glints, raving and longing to bite her. And finally there on the back seat of the Volkswagen in an abrupt swerve I fell on her and I sank my teeth into her skin just where the ‘American cut’ of her sleeves left her shoulder bare, and she dug her sharp nails between the buttons of my shirt, and this is the same impulse as before, the impulse that tended to remove her (or remove me) from marine citizenship and now instead tends to remove the sea from her, from me, in any case to achieve the passage from the blazing element of life to the pale and opaque element which is our absence from the ocean and the absence of the ocean from us.

The same impulse acts then with amorous obstinacy between her and me and with hostile obstinacy against Signor Cècere: for each of us there is no other way of entering into a relationship with the others; I mean, it’s always this impulse that nourishes our own relationship with the others in the most different and unrecognizable forms, as when Signor Cècere passes cars of greater horsepower than his, even a Porsche, through intentions of mastery towards these superior cars and through ill-advised amorous intentions towards Zylphia and also vindictive ones towards me and also self-destructive ones towards himself. So, through risk, the insignificance of the outside manages to interfere with the essential element, the sea where Zylphia and I continue our nuptial flights of fertilization and destruction: since the risk aims directly at the blood, at our blood, for if it were a matter only of the blood of Signor Cècere (a driver, after all, heedless of the traffic laws) we should hope that at the very least he would run off the road, but in effect it’s a question of all of us, of the risk of a possible return of our blood from darkness to the Sun, from the separate to the mixed, a false return, as all of us in our ambiguous game pretend to forget, because our present inside once it is poured out becomes our present outside and it can no longer return to being the outside of the old days.

So Zylphia and I in falling upon each other in the curves play at provoking vibrations in the blood, that is at permitting the false thrills of the insipid outside to be added to those that vibrated from the depths of the millennia and of the marine abysses, and then Signor Cècere said: ‘Let’s have a nice plate of spaghetti at the truck drivers’ café,’ masking as generous love of life his constant torpid violence, and Jenny Fumagalli, acting clever, spoke up: ‘But you have to get to the spaghetti first, before the truck drivers, otherwise they won’t leave you any,’ clever and always working in the service of the blackest destruction, and the black truck with the number plate Udine 38 96 21 was there ahead, roaring at its forty mph along the road that was nothing but curves, and Signor Cècere thought (and perhaps said): ‘I’ll make it,’ and he swung out to the left, and we all thought (and didn’t say): ‘You can’t make it,’ and in fact, from the curve the Jaguar was already arriving full tilt, and to avoid it the Volkswagen scraped the wall and bounced back to scrape its side against the curved chrome bumper and, bouncing, it struck the plane tree, then went spinning down into the precipice, and the sea of common blood which floods over the crumpled metal isn’t the blood-sea of our origin but only an infinitesimal detail of the outside, of the insignificant and arid outside, a number in the statistics of accidents over the weekend.





PART TWO


Priscilla





In asexual reproduction, the simplest entity which is the cell divides at a point in its growth. The nucleus divides into two equal parts, and from a single entity, two result. But we cannot say that a first entity has given birth to a second. The two new entities are, to the same degree, the products of the first. The first has disappeared. Essentially, it is dead, since only the two entities it has produced survive. It does not decompose in the way sexed animals die, but it ceases to be. It ceases to be, in the sense that it is discontinuous. But, in a point of the reproduction, there was continuity. There exists a point where the primitive one becomes two. When there are two, there is again discontinuity in each of the entities. But the passage implies an instant of continuity between the two. The first dies, but in its death appears a fundamental instant of continuity.

Georges Bataille, L’Érotisme (from the introduction)





All genes of the same chromosome are not always pulled into the same daughter cell, and so are not always inherited together, though they do tend to be. For two homologous filaments, during their synapsis with one another, are apt to break, at identical points, and to become joined up again with their corresponding pieces interchanged, a process called crossing-over. Thus a given gene of paternal origin may in the mature germ cell find itself in the same chromosome with some other gene of maternal origin, instead of with its former associate gene.

Encyclopaedia Britannica, ‘Gene’





… in the midst of the Aeneases who carry their Anchiseses on their backs, I pass from one shore to another, alone, hating these invisible parents astride their sons for all their life …

J.-P. Sartre, Les Mots





Suddenly I became aware that an adenine-thymine pair held together by two hydrogen bonds was identical in shape to a guanine-cytosine pair held together by at least two hydrogen bonds. All the hydrogen bonds seemed to form naturally; no fudging was required to make the two types of base pairs identical in shape. Quickly I called Jerry over to ask him whether this time he had any objection to my new base pairs. When he said no, my morale skyrocketed … this type of double helix suggested a replication scheme much more satisfactory … Given the base sequence of one chain, that of its partner was automatically determined. Conceptually, it was thus very easy to visualize how a single chain could be the template for the synthesis of a chain with the complementary sequence. Upon his arrival Francis did not get more than halfway through the door before I let loose that the answer to everything was in our hands …

James D. Watson, The Double Helix: A Personal Account

of the Discovery of the Structure of DNA, Chap. 26





Everything summons us to death; nature, as if envious of the good she had done us, announces to us often and reminds us that she cannot leave us for long that bit of matter she lends us, which must not remain in the same hands, and which must eternally be in circulation: she needs it for other forms, she asks it back for other works.

Bossuet, Sermon sur la mort





One need not worry about how a fixed automaton of this sort can produce others which are larger and more complex than itself. In this case the greater size and the higher complexity of the object to be constructed will be reflected in a presumably still greater size of the instructions I that have to be furnished … In what follows, all automata for whose construction the facility A will be used are going to share with A this property. All of them will have a place for an instruction I, that is, a place where such an instruction can be inserted … It is quite clear that the instruction I is roughly effecting the function of a gene. It is also clear that the copying mechanism B performs the fundamental act of reproduction, the duplication of the genetic material, which is clearly the fundamental operation in the multiplication of living cells.

Johann von Neumann,

Theory of Automata (in Collected Works, Vol. 5)





As for those who so exalt incorruptibility, inalterability, I believe they are brought to say these things through their great desire to live a long time and through the terror they have of death. And not considering that, if men were immortal, these men would not have had an opportunity to come into the world. They would deserve to encounter a Medusa’s head, which would transform them into statues of jasper or of diamond, to make them more perfect than they are … And there is not the slightest doubt that the Earth is far more perfect, being, as it is, alterable, changeable, than if it were a mass of stone, even if it were a whole diamond, hard and impenetrable.

Galileo Galilei, Dialogo sopra i due massimi sistemi, giornata I





I. Mitosis




… And when I say ‘dying of love’ – Qfwfq went on – I mean something you have no idea of, because you think falling in love has to signify falling in love with another person, or thing, or what have you, in other words I’m here and what I’m in love with is there, in short a relationship connected to the life of relationships, whereas I’m talking about the times before I had established any relationships between myself and anything else, there was a cell and the cell was me, and that was that. Now we needn’t wonder whether there were other cells around too, it doesn’t matter, there was the cell that was me and it was already quite an achievement, such a thing is more than enough to fill one’s life, and it’s this very sense of fullness I want to talk to you about. I don’t mean fullness because of the protoplasm I had, because even if it had increased to a considerable degree it wasn’t anything exceptional, cells of course are full of protoplasm, what else could they be full of; no, I’m talking about a sense of fullness that was, if you’ll allow the expression, quote spiritual unquote, namely the awareness that this cell was me, this sense of fullness, this fullness of being aware was something that kept me awake nights, something that made me beside myself, in other words the situation I mentioned before, I was ‘dying of love’.

Now I know all of you will raise a flock of objections because being in love presupposes not only self-awareness but also awareness of the other, et cetera, et cetera, and all I can answer is thanks a lot I know that much myself but if you aren’t going to be patient there’s no use in my trying to explain, and above all you have to forget for a minute the way you fall in love nowadays, the way I do too now, if you’ll permit me confidences of this sort, I say confidences because I know if I told you about my falling in love at present you could accuse me of being indiscreet, whereas I can talk without any scruples about the time when I was a unicellular organism, that is I can talk about it objectively as the saying goes, because it’s all water under the bridge now, and it’s a feat on my part even to remember it, and yet what I do remember is still enough to disturb me from head to foot, so when I use the word ‘objectively’ it’s a figure of speech, as it always is when you start out saying you’re objective and then what with one thing and another you end up being subjective, and so this business I want to tell you about is difficult for me precisely because it keeps slipping into the subjective, in my subjective state of those days, which though I recall it only partially still disturbs me from head to foot like my subjective of the present, and that’s why I’ve used expressions that have the disadvantage of creating confusion with what is different nowadays while they have the advantage of bringing to light what is common between the two times.

First of all I must be more specific about what little I remember, or rather I should warn you that if certain parts of my story are narrated less fully than others it doesn’t mean they’re less important but only that they are less firm in my memory, since what I remember well is my love story’s initial phase if you want to call it that, I would almost say the preceding phase; at the climax of the love story my memory dissolves, frays, goes to pieces, and there’s no way for me to remember then what happens afterwards. I say this not to ward off objections that I’m trying to make you listen to a love story I don’t even remember, but to clarify the fact that not remembering it is at a certain point necessary to make the story this one and not another, in other words while a story usually consists in the memory you have of it, here not remembering the story becomes the very story itself.

So I am speaking then of the initial phase of a love story which afterwards is probably repeated in an interminable multiplication of initial phases just like the first and identified with the first, a multiplication or rather a squaring, an exponential growth of stories which is always tantamount to the first story, but it isn’t as if I were so very sure of all this, I assume it as you can also assume it. I’m referring to an initial phase that precedes the other initial phases, a first phase which must surely have existed, because it’s logical to expect it to exist, and also because I remember it very well, and when I say it’s the first I don’t in the least mean first in the absolute sense, that’s what you’d like me to mean but I don’t; I mean first in the sense that we can consider any of these identical initial phases the first, and the one I refer to is the one I remember, the one I remember as first in the sense that before it I don’t remember anything. And as for the first in the absolute sense, your guess is as good as mine, I’m not interested.

Let’s begin this way, then: there is a cell, and this cell is a unicellular organism, and this unicellular organism is me, and I know it, and I’m pleased about it. Nothing special so far. Now let’s try to represent this situation for ourselves in space and time. Time passes, and I, more and more pleased with being in it and with being me, am also more and more pleased that there is time, and that I am in time, or rather that time passes and I pass time and time passes me, or rather I am pleased to be contained in time, to be the content of time, or the container, in short, to mark by being me the passing of time. Now you must admit this begins to arouse a sense of expectation, a happy and hopeful waiting, a happy youthful impatience, and also an anxiety, a youthful excited anxiety also basically painful, a painful unbearable tension and impatience. In addition you must keep in mind that existing also means being in space, and in fact I was dished out into space to my full width, with space all around, and even though I had no knowledge it obviously continued on all sides. There’s no point in bothering now about what else this space contained, I was closed in myself and I minded my own business, and I didn’t even have a nose so I couldn’t stick my nose out, or an eye to take an interest in outside, in what was and what wasn’t; however, I had the sense of occupying space within space, of wallowing in it, of growing with my protoplasm in various directions, but as I said, I don’t want to insist on this quantitative and material aspect, I want to talk above all about the satisfaction and the burning desire to do something with space, to have time to extract enjoyment from space, to have space to make something in the passing of time.

Up until now I’ve kept time and space separated to help you to understand me better, or rather so that I could understand better what I should make you understand, but in those days I didn’t really distinguish too clearly what one of them was from what the other was: there was me, in that point and at that moment – right? – and then there was an outside which seemed to me a void I might occupy in another moment or point, in a series of other points or moments, in short a potential projection of me where, however, I wasn’t present, and therefore a void which was actually the world and the future, but I didn’t know that yet; it was void because perception was still denied me, and as for imagination I was even further behind, and when it came to mental categories I was a total loss, but I had this contentment because outside of me there was this void that wasn’t me, which perhaps could become me because ‘me’ was the only word I knew, the only word I could have declined, a void that could become me, however, wasn’t me at that moment and basically never would be: it was the discovery of something else that wasn’t yet something but anyhow wasn’t me, or rather wasn’t me at that moment and in that point and therefore was something else, and this discovery aroused an exhilarating enthusiasm in me, no, a torment, a dizzying torture, the dizziness of a void which represented everything possible, the complement of that fullness that was for me all, and there I was brimming over with love for this elsewhere, this other time, this otherwise, silent and void.

So you see that when I spoke of being ‘in love’ I wasn’t saying something so far-fetched, and you were always on the point of interrupting me to say: ‘In love with yourself, um-hum, in love with yourself,’ and I was wise to pay no attention and not use or let you use that expression; there, you see that being in love was even then searing passion for what was outside me, it was the writhing of one who yearns to escape outside himself as I then went rolling around in time and space, dying of love.

To tell properly the way things proceeded I must remind you of how I was made, a mass of protoplasm like a kind of pulpy dumpling with a nucleus in the middle. Now I’m not just trying to make myself sound interesting, but I must say that in that nucleus I led a very intense life. Physically I was an individual in his full flowering, all right, on this point I feel it would be indiscreet to insist: I was young, healthy, at the peak of my strength, but by that I certainly don’t want to deny that another who might have been in worse shape, with his cytoplasm fragile or watery, could have revealed even greater talents. What’s important to my story is how much of this physical life of mine was reflected in the nucleus; I say physical not because there was a distinction between physical life and some other kind of life, but to allow you to understand how physical life had, in the nucleus, its point of greatest concentration, sensitivity and tension, so that while all around it I was perhaps calm and blissful in my whitish pulp, the nucleus shared in this cytoplasmic calm and bliss in its nucleic way, that is, accentuating and thickening the tangled grain and speckling that adorned it, and so I concealed in myself an intense nucleic labour which then corresponded only to my exterior well-being, so that, we might say, the more I was happy to be me, the more my nucleus became charged with this thick impatience, and everything I was and everything I was gradually becoming ended up being nucleus, absorbed there and registered and accumulated in a serpentine twisting of spirals, in the gradually different way that they were forming a skein and unravelling, so I would say that everything I knew I knew in the nucleus, if that wouldn’t involve the danger of making you believe in a separate or perhaps even opposing function of the nucleus with respect to the rest, whereas if there’s an agile and impulsive organism where you can’t make all these distinctions that is the unicellular organism. However, I don’t want to exaggerate in the other direction either, as if to give you the idea of a chemical homogeneity like an inorganic drop spilled there; you know better than I how many differentiations there are within the cell, and even within the nucleus, and mine was in fact all speckled, freckled, dotted with filaments or strokes or lines, and each of these filaments or strokes or lines or chromosomes had a specific relationship to some characteristic of the cell that was me. Now I might attempt a somewhat risky assertion and say I was nothing but the sum of those filaments or lines or strokes, an assertion which can be disputed because of the fact that I was I entirely and not a part of myself, but one that can also be sustained by explaining that those strokes were myself translated into strokes, to then be retranslated back into me. And therefore when I speak of the intense life of the nucleus I don’t mean so much the rustle or scraping of all those lines inside the nucleus as the nervousness of an individual who knows he has all those lines, he is all those lines, but also knows there’s something that can’t be represented with those lines, a void of which those lines succeed only in feeling the emptiness. Or rather the tension towards the outside, the elsewhere, the otherwise, which is what is then called a state of desire.

I had better be more precise about this state of desire business: a state of desire takes place when from a state of satisfaction one passes to a state of mounting satisfaction and then, immediately thereafter, to a state of dissatisfying satisfaction, namely, of desire. It isn’t true that the state of desire takes place when something is missing; if something is missing, too bad, you do without it, and if the something is indispensable, in doing without it you do without some vital function, and therefore you proceed rapidly towards certain extinction. I mean that from a pure and simple state of lack nothing can be born, nothing good and nothing bad, only other lacks including finally the lack of life, a condition notoriously neither good nor bad. But a state of lack pure and simple doesn’t exist, as far as I know, in nature: the state of lack is experienced always in contrast with a previous state of satisfaction, and it is from the state of satisfaction that everything which can grow, grows. And it isn’t true that a state of desire presupposes necessarily a desired something; the desired something begins to exist only when there is the state of desire; not because before that something wasn’t desired but because before who knew it existed? So once there’s the state of desire it’s precisely that something which begins to be, something which if all goes well will be the desired something but which could also remain just a something through lack of the desirer who in desiring might also cease to be, as in the present case of ‘dying of love’, which we still don’t know the end of. Then, to go back to the point where we were before, I must tell you that my state of desire tended simply towards an elsewhere, another time, an otherwise that might contain something (or, let’s say, the world) or contain only me, or me in relation to something (or to the world), or something (the world) without me any more.

To make this point clear, I realize now, I have gone back to talking in general terms, losing the ground gained with my previous clarifications; this often happens in love stories. I was becoming aware of what was happening around me through what was happening to the nucleus and especially to the chromosomes of the nucleus; through them I gained the awareness of a void beyond me and beyond them, the fitful awareness that through them forced me to something, a state of desire which, however little we can move, becomes immediately a movement of desire. This movement of desire remained basically a desire for movement, as usually happens when you can’t move towards some place because the world doesn’t exist or you don’t know it exists, and in these cases desire moves you to want to do, to do something, or rather to do anything. But when you can do nothing because of the lack of an outside world, the only doing you can allow yourself with the scant means at your disposal is that special kind of doing that is saying. In short, I was moved to express: my state of desire, my state-motion-desire of motion-desire-love moved me to say, and since the only thing I had to say was myself, I was moved to say myself, to express myself. I’ll be more precise: before, when I said that very few means suffice for expressing, I wasn’t telling the exact truth, and therefore I’ll correct myself: for expressing you need a language, and that’s no trifle. As language I had all those specks or twigs called chromosomes, and therefore all I had to do was repeat those specks or twigs and I was repeating myself, obviously repeating myself in so far as language was concerned, which as you will see is the first step towards repeating myself as such, which as you will also see isn’t repetition at all. But you’d better see what you’re going to see when the right time comes, because if I keep making clarifications within other clarifications I’ll never find my way out again.

It’s true that at this point we must proceed with great care to avoid falling into errors. All this situation I’ve tried to narrate and which at the beginning I defined as being ‘in love’, explaining then how this phrase must be understood – all this, in short, had repercussions inside the nucleus in a quantitative and energetic enrichment of the chromosomes, indeed in their joyful doubling, because each of the chromosomes was repeated in a second chromosome. Speaking of the nucleus, I naturally tend to identify it with awareness, which is only a rather crude simplification, but even if things really were like that, it wouldn’t imply awareness of possessing a double number of lines, because since each line had a function, each being – to return to the language metaphor – a word, the fact that one word was to be found twice didn’t change what I was, since I consisted of the assortment or the vocabulary of the different words or functions at my disposal and the fact of having double words was felt in that sense of fullness which I earlier called quote spiritual unquote, and now you see how the quotation marks alluded to the fact that we were dealing with a basically quite material business of filaments or lines or twigs, though none the less joyful and energetic.

So far I remember everything very well, because the memories of the nucleus, awareness or no awareness, retain a greater clarity. But this tension I was telling you about, as time went by, was transmitted to the cytoplasm: I was seized with a need to stretch to my full width, to a kind of intermittent stiffening of the nerves I didn’t have: and so the cytoplasm had become more elongated as if the two extremes wanted to run away from each other, in a bundle of fibrous matter which was all trembling no more and no less than the nucleus. In fact, it was now hard to distinguish between nucleus and cytoplasm: the nucleus had so to speak dissolved and the little sticks were poised there halfway along this shaft of tense and fitful fibres, but without scattering, turning upon themselves all together like a merry-go-round.

To tell the truth, I had hardly noticed the explosion of the nucleus: I felt I was all myself in a more total way than ever before, and at the same time that I wasn’t myself any longer, that all this me was a place where there was everything except me: what I mean is, I had the sense of being inhabited, no, of inhabiting myself. No, of inhabiting a me inhabited by others. No, I had the sense that another was inhabited by others. Instead, what I realized only then was that fact of redoubling which before as I said I hadn’t seen clearly: then and there I found myself with an exorbitant number of chromosomes, all mixed together at the time because the pairs of twin chromosomes had become unstuck and I couldn’t make head or tail of anything. In other words: faced by the mute unknown void into which I had gradually and amorously submerged myself I had to say something that would re-establish my presence, but at that moment the words at my disposal seemed so many to me, too many to be arranged into something to say that was still me, my name, my new name.

I remember another thing: how from this state of chaotic congestion I tended to pass, in a vain search for relief, to a more balanced and neat congestion, to have a complete assortment of chromosomes arranged on one side and another on the other side, so the nucleus – or rather that whirligig of strokes that had taken the place of the exploded nucleus – at a certain point finally assumed a symmetrical, mirrored appearance, as if divaricating its strength to dominate the challenge of the silent unknown void, so the redoubling which first concerned the individual twigs now involved the nucleus as a whole, or rather what I went on considering a sole nucleus and went on operating as such, though it was simply an eddy of stuff separating into two distinct eddies.

Here I must explain that this separation wasn’t a matter of old chromosomes on one side and new chromosomes on the other, because if I haven’t already told you I’ll tell you now, every twig after thickening had divided lengthwise, so they were all equally old and equally new; this is important because I used before the verb ‘to repeat’, which as always was rather approximate and might give the mistaken idea that there was an original twig and a copy, and also the verb ‘to say’ was a bit out of place, although that expression about saying myself worked out fairly well, out of place in that to say something you have to have someone who says and something that’s said, and this wasn’t actually the case at that time.

It’s difficult, in other words, to define in precise terms the imprecision of amorous moods, which consist in a joyous impatience to possess a void, in a greedy expectation of what might come to me from the void, and also in the pain of being still deprived of what I am impatiently and greedily expecting, in the tormenting pain of feeling myself already potentially doubled to possess potentially something potentially mine, and yet forced not to possess, to consider not mine and therefore potentially another’s what I potentially possess. The pain of having to bear the fact that the potentially mine is also potentially another’s, or, for all I know, actually another’s; this greedy jealous pain is a state of such fullness that it makes you believe being in love consists entirely and only in pain, that the greedy impatience is nothing but jealous desperation, and the emotion of impatience is only the emotion of despair that twists within itself, becoming more and more desperate, with the capacity that each particle of despair has for redoubling and arranging itself symmetrically alongside the analogous particle and for tending to move from its own state to enter another, perhaps worse state which rends and lacerates the former.

In this tug of war between the two eddies, an interval was being formed, and this was the moment when my state of doubling began to be clear to me, first as a branching of awareness, as a kind of squinting of the sense of presence of all of me, because it wasn’t only the nucleus which was affected by these phenomena; as you already know, everything going on there in the little sticks of the nucleus was reflected in what was happening in the extension of my tapering physical person, commanded in fact by those sticks. So my cytoplasm fibres were also becoming concentrated in two opposing directions and were growing thin in the middle until the moment came when I seemed to have two equal bodies, one on one side and one on the other, joined by a bottleneck that was becoming finer and finer until it was only a thread, and at that instant I was for the first time aware of plurality, for the first and last time because it was late by then, I felt the plurality in me as the image and destiny of the world’s plurality, and the sense of being part of the world, of being lost in the innumerable world, and at the same time the still-sharp sense of being me; I say ‘sense’ and no longer ‘awareness’ because if we agree to call awareness what I felt in the nucleus, then the nuclei were two, and each was tearing at the last fibres that kept it bound to the other, and by now they were both transmitting on their own, on my own now, on my own in a repeated fashion, each independent, awareness as if stammering ripped away the last fibres of my memory my memories.

I say that the sense of being me no longer came from the nuclei but from that bit of plasma strangled and wrung out there in the middle, and it was still like a filiform zenith of fullness, like a delirium where I saw all the diversities of the plural world filiformly radiating from my former, singular continuity. And at the same moment I realized that my moving out of myself was an exit with no return, without possible restitution of the me that now I realize I’m throwing away without its possible restitution to me ever, and then comes the death agony that precipitates triumphantly because life is already elsewhere, already the flashes of another’s memory of the other cell which are split not superimposed establish the relationship of the novice cell, the relationship with its novice self and with the rest.

Everything that came afterwards is lost in the memory, shattered and multiplied like the propagation and repetition in the world of unremembering and mortal individuals, but already an instant before that afterwards began I understood everything that was to happen, the future or the soldering of the link that now or already then happens or tended desperately to happen, I understood that this picking up and moving out of oneself which is birth-death would make the circuit, would be transformed from strangling and fracture into interpenetration and mingling of asymmetrical cells that add up the messages repeated through trillions of trillions of mortal loves, I saw my mortal love return to seeking the original soldering or the final one, and all the words that weren’t exact in the narration of my love story became exact and yet their meaning remained the exact meaning of before, and the loves kindled in the forest of the plurality of the sexes and of the individuals and of the species, the empty dizziness filled with the form of the species and individuals and sexes, and yet there was always the repetition of that wrench of myself, of that picking up and moving out, picking myself up and moving out of myself, the yearning towards that impossible doing which leads to saying, that impossible saying that leads to expressing oneself, even when the self will be divided into a self that says and will surely die and a self that is said and that at times risks living on, in a multicellular and unique self that retains in its cells the one that, repeating itself, repeats the secret words of the vocabulary that we are, and in a unicellular and countlessly plural unicellular self which can be poured out in countless cell-words of which only the one that encounters the complementary cell-word that is its asymmetrical self will try to continue the continuous and fragmentary story, but if it doesn’t encounter it, no matter; in fact in the story which I’m about to tell there was no plan for the encounter at all, indeed at the beginning we’ll try to avoid its taking place, because what matters is the initial or rather preceding phase which repeats every initial or rather preceding phase, the encounter with oneself loving and mortal, in the best of cases loving and in any case mortal; what matters is the moment when wrenching yourself from yourself you feel in a flash the union of past and future, just as I, in the wrenching from myself which I have just now finished narrating to you, saw what was to happen, finding myself today in love, in a today perhaps in the future perhaps in the past but also surely contemporaneous with that last unicellular and self-contained instant. I saw who was coming forward towards me from the void of the elsewhere, the other time, the otherwise with first and last name address red coat little black boots fringe freckles: Priscilla Langwood, chez Madame Lebras, cent-quatre-vingt-treize Rue Vaugirard, Paris quinzième.





II. Meiosis




Narrating things as they are means narrating them from the beginning, and even if I start the story at a point where the characters are multicellular organisms, for example the story of my relationship with Priscilla, I have first to define clearly what I mean when I say me and what I mean when I say Priscilla, then I can go on to establish what this relationship was. So I’ll begin by saying that Priscilla is an individual of my same species and of the sex opposite mine, multicellular as I now find myself, too; but having said this I still haven’t said anything, because I must specify that by multicellular individual is meant a complex of about fifty trillion cells very different among themselves but marked by certain chains of identical acids in the chromosomes of each cell of each individual, acids that determine various processes in the proteins of the cells themselves.

So narrating the story of me and Priscilla means first of all defining the relations established between my proteins and Priscilla’s proteins, commanded, both mine and hers, by chains of nucleic acids arranged in identical series in each of her cells and in each of mine. Then narrating this story becomes still more complicated than when it was a question of a single cell, not only because the description of the relationship must take into account so many things that happen at the same time but above all because it’s necessary to establish who is having relations with whom, before specifying what sort of relations they are. Actually, when you come right down to it, defining the sort of relations isn’t after all as important as it seems, because saying we have mental relations, for example, or else, for example, physical relations doesn’t change much, since a mental relationship involves several billion special cells called neurons which, however, function by receiving stimuli from such a great number of other cells that we might just as well consider all the trillions of cells of the organism at once as we do when we talk about a physical relationship.

In saying how difficult it is to establish who’s having relations with whom we must first clear the decks of a subject that often crops up in conversation: namely, the fact that from one moment to the next I am no longer the same I nor is Priscilla any longer the same Priscilla, because of the continuous renewal of the protein molecules in our cells through, for example, digestion or also respiration which fixes the oxygen in the bloodstream. This kind of argument takes us completely off our course because while it’s true that the cells are renewed, in renewing themselves they go on following the programme established by those that were there before and so in this sense you could reasonably insist that I continue to be I and Priscilla, Priscilla. This in other words is not the problem, but perhaps it was of some use to raise it because it helps us realize that things aren’t as simple as they seem and so we slowly approach the point where we will realize how complicated they are.

Well then, when I say I, or when I say Priscilla, what do I mean? I mean that special configuration which my cells and her cells assume through a special relationship between the environment and a special genetic heritage which from the beginning seemed invented on purpose to cause my cells to be mine and Priscilla’s cells to be Priscilla’s. As we proceed we’ll see that nothing is made on purpose, that nobody has invented anything, that the way I am and Priscilla is really doesn’t matter in the least to anyone: all a genetic heritage has to do is to transmit what was transmitted to it for transmitting, not giving a damn about how it’s received. But for the moment let’s limit ourselves to answering the question if I, in quotes, and Priscilla, in quotes, are our genetic heritage, in quotes, or our form, in quotes. And when I say form I mean both what is seen and what isn’t seen, namely, all her way of being Priscilla, the fact that fuchsia or orange is becoming to her, the scent emanating from her skin not only because she was born with a glandular constitution suited to giving off that scent but also because of everything she has eaten in her life and the brands of soap she has used, in other words because of what is called, in quotes, culture, and also her way of walking and of sitting down which comes to her from the way she has moved among those who move in the cities and houses and streets where she’s lived, all this but also the things she has in her memory, after having seen them perhaps just once and perhaps at the movies, and also the forgotten things which still remain recorded somewhere in the back of the neurons like all the psychic trauma a person has to swallow from infancy on.

Now, both in the form you see and don’t see and in our genetic heritage, Priscilla and I have absolutely identical elements – common to the two of us, or to the environment, or to the species – and also elements which establish a difference. Then the problem begins to arise whether the relationship between me and Priscilla is the relationship only between the differential elements, because the common ones can be overlooked in both – that is, whether by ‘Priscilla’ we must understand ‘what is peculiar to Priscilla as far as the other members of the species are concerned’ – or whether the relationship is between the common elements, and then we must decide if it’s the ones common to the species or to the environment or to the two of us as distinct from the rest of the species and perhaps more beautiful than the others.

On closer examination, if individuals of opposite sex enter into a particular relationship it clearly isn’t we who decide but the species, or rather not so much the species as the animal condition, or the vegetable-animal condition of the animal-vegetives distinguished into distinct sexes. Now, in the choice I make of Priscilla to have with her relations whose nature I don’t yet know – and in the choice that Priscilla makes of me, assuming that she does choose me and doesn’t change her mind at the last moment – no one knows what order of priority comes first into play, therefore no one knows how many I’s precede the I that I think I am, and how many Priscillas precede the Priscilla towards whom I believe I am running.

In short, the more you simplify the terms of the question the more they become complicated: once we’ve established that what I call ‘I’ consists of a certain number of amino acids which line up in a certain way, it’s logical that inside these molecules all possible relations are foreseen, and from outside we have nothing but the exclusion of some of the possible relations in the form of certain enzymes which block certain processes. Therefore you can say that it’s as if everything possible had already happened to me, including the possibility of its not happening: once I am I the cards are all dealt, I dispose of a finite number of possibilities and no more, what happens outside counts for me only if it’s translated into operations already foreseen by my nucleic acids, I’m walled up within myself, chained to my molecular programme: outside of me I don’t have and won’t have relations with anything or with anybody. And neither will Priscilla; I mean the real Priscilla, poor thing. If around me and around her there’s some stuff that seems to have relations with other stuff, these are facts that don’t concern us: in reality for me and for her nothing substantial can happen.

Hardly a cheerful situation, therefore: and not because I was expecting to have a more complex individuality than the one given me, beginning with a special arrangement of an acid and of four basic substances which in their turn command the disposition of about twenty amino acids in the forty-six chromosomes of each cell I have; but because this individuality repeated in each of my cells is mine only after a manner of speaking, since out of forty-six chromosomes twenty-three come to me from my father and twenty-three from my mother, that is, I continue carrying my parents with me in all my cells, and I’ll never be able to free myself of this burden.

What my parents programmed me to be in the beginning is what I am: that and nothing else. And in my parents’ instructions are contained the instructions of my parents’ parents handed down in turn from parent to parent in an endless chain of obedience. The story I wanted to narrate therefore is not only impossible to narrate but first of all impossible to live, because it’s all there already, contained in a past that can’t be narrated since, in turn, it’s included in its own past, in the many individual pasts – so many that we can’t really be sure they aren’t the past of the species and of what existed before the species, a general past to which all individual pasts refer but which no matter how far you go back doesn’t exist except in the form of individual cases, such as Priscilla and I might be, between which, however, nothing happens, individual or general.

What each of us really is and has is the past; all we are and have is the catalogue of the possibilities that didn’t fail, of the experiences that are ready to be repeated. A present doesn’t exist, we proceed blindly towards the outside and the afterwards, carrying out an established programme with materials we fabricate ourselves, always the same. We don’t tend towards any future, there’s nothing awaiting us, we’re shut within the system of a memory which foresees no task but remembering itself. What now leads me and Priscilla to seek each other isn’t an impulse towards the afterwards: it’s the final action of the past that is fulfilled through us. Goodbye, Priscilla, our encounter, our embrace are useless, we remain distant, or finally near, in other words for ever apart.

Separation, the impossibility of meeting, has been in us from the very beginning. We were born not from a fusion but from a juxtaposition of distinct bodies. Two cells grazed each other: one is lazy and all pulp, the other is only a head and a darting tail. They are egg and seed: they experience a certain timidity; then they rush – at their different speeds – and hurry towards each other. The seed plunges headlong into the egg; the tail is left outside; the head – all full of nucleus – is shot at the nucleus of the egg; the two nuclei are shattered: you might expect heaven knows what fusion or mingling or exchange of selves; instead, what was written in one nucleus and in the other, those spaced lines, fall in and arrange themselves, on each side, in the new nucleus, very closely printed; the words of both nuclei fit in, whole and clearly separate. In short, nobody was lost in the other, nobody has given in or has given himself; the two cells now one are packaged together but just as they were before: the first thing they feel is a slight disappointment. Meanwhile the double nucleus has begun its sequence of duplications, printing the combined messages of father and mother in each of the offspring cells, perpetuating not so much the union as the unbridgeable distance that separates in each couple the two companions, the failure, the void that remains in the midst of even the most successful couple.

Of course, on every disputed issue our cells can follow the instructions of a single parent and thus feel free of the other’s command, but we know what we claim to be in our exterior form counts for little compared to the secret programme we carry printed in each cell, where the contradictory orders of father and mother continue arguing. What really counts is this incompatible quarrel of father and mother that each of us drags after him, with the rancour of every point where one partner has had to give way to the other, who then raises his voice still louder in his victory as dominant mate. So the characteristics that determine my interior and exterior form, when they are not the sum or the average of the orders received from father and mother together, are orders denied in the depth of the cells, counterbalanced by different orders which have remained latent, sapped by the suspicion that perhaps the other orders were better. So at times I’m seized with uncertainty as to whether I am really the sum of the dominant characteristics of the past, the result of a series of operations that produced always a number bigger than zero, or whether instead my true essence isn’t rather what descends from the succession of defeated characteristics, the total of the terms with the minus sign, of everything that in the tree of derivations has remained excluded, stifled, interrupted: the weight of what hasn’t been weighs on me, no less crushing than what has been and couldn’t not be.

Void, separation and waiting, that’s what we are. And such we remain even on the day when the past inside us rediscovers its original forms, clustering into swarms of seed-cells or concentrated ripening of the egg-cells, and finally the words written in the nuclei are no longer the same as before but are no longer part of us either, they’re a message beyond us, which already belongs to us no more. In a hidden point in ourselves the double series of orders from the past is divided in two and the new cells find themselves with a simple past, no longer double, which gives them lightness and the illusion of being really new, of having a new past that almost seems a future.

Now, I’ve said it hastily like this but it’s a complicated process, there in the darkness of the nucleus, in the depth of the sex organs, a succession of phases some a bit jumbled with others, but from which there’s no turning back. At first the pairs of maternal and paternal messages which thus far had remained separate seem to remember they’re couples and they join together two by two, so many fine little threads that become interwoven and confused; the desire to copulate outside myself now leads me to copulate within myself, at the depths of the extreme roots of the matter I’m made of, to couple the memory of the ancient pair I carry within me, the first couple, that is both the one that comes immediately before me, mother and father, and the absolute first one, the couple at the animal-vegetal origins of the first coupling on Earth, and so the forty-six filaments that an obscure and secret cell bears in the nucleus are knotted two by two, still not giving up their old disagreement, since in fact they immediately try to disentangle themselves but remain stuck at some point in the knot, so when in the end they do succeed, with a wrench, in separating – because meanwhile the mechanism of separation has taken possession of the whole cell, stretching out its pulp – each chromosome discovers it’s changed, made of segments that first belonged some to one and some to the other, and it moves from the other, now changed too, marked by the alternate exchanges of the segments, and already two cells are being detached each with twenty-three chromosomes, the chromosomes in one cell different from those in the other, and in each case different from those that were in the previous cell, and at the next doubling there will be four cells all different, each with twenty-three chromosomes, in which what was the father’s and the mother’s, or rather the fathers’ and the mothers’, is mingled.

So finally the encounter of the pasts which can never take place in the present of those who believe they are meeting does take place in the form of the past of him who comes afterwards and who cannot live that encounter in his own present. We believe we’re going towards our marriage, but it is still the marriage of the fathers and the mothers which is celebrated through our expectation and our desire. What seems to us our happiness is perhaps only the happiness of the others’ story which ends just where we thought ours began.

And it’s pointless for us to run, Priscilla, to meet each other and follow each other: the past disposes of us with blind indifference, and once it has moved those fragments of itself and of us, it doesn’t bother afterwards how we spend them. We were only the preparation, the envelope, for the encounter of pasts which happens through us but which is already part of another story, the story of the afterwards: the encounters always take place before and after us, and in them the elements of the new, forbidden to us, are active: chance, risk, improbability.

This is how we live, not free, surrounded by freedom, driven, acted on by this constant wave which is the combination of the possible cases and which passes through those points of space and of time in which the range of the pasts is joined to the range of the futures. The primordial sea was a soup of beringed molecules traversed at intervals by the messages of the similarity and of the difference that surrounded us and imposed new combinations. So the ancient tide rises at intervals in me and in Priscilla following the course of the Moon; so the sexed species respond to the old conditioning which prescribes ages and seasons of loves and also grants extensions and postponements to the ages and the seasons and at times becomes involved in obstinacies and coercions and vices.

In other words, Priscilla and I are only meeting places for messages from the past: not only for messages among themselves, but for messages meeting answers to messages. And as the different elements and molecules answer messages in different ways – imperceptibly or boundlessly different – so the messages vary according to the world that receives them and interprets them, or else, to remain the same, they are forced to change. You might say, then, that the messages are not messages at all, that a past to transmit doesn’t exist, and only so many futures exist which correct the course of the past, which give it form, which invent it.

The story I wanted to tell is the encounter of two individuals who don’t exist, since they are definable only with regard to a past or a future, a past and future whose reality is reciprocally doubted. Or else it’s a story that cannot be separated from the story of all the rest of what exists, and therefore from the story of what doesn’t exist and, not existing, causes what does exist to exist. All we can say is that in certain points and moments that interval of void which is our individual presence is grazed by the wave which continues to renew the combinations of molecules and to complicate them or erase them, and this is enough to give us the certitude that somebody is ‘I’ and somebody is ‘Priscilla’ in the temporal and spatial distribution of the living cells, and that something happens or has happened or will happen which involves us directly and – I would dare say – happily and totally. This is in itself enough, Priscilla, to cheer me, when I bend my outstretched neck over yours and I give you a little nip on your yellow fur and you dilate your nostrils, bare your teeth and kneel on the sand, lowering your hump to the level of my breast so that I can lean on it and press you from behind, bearing down on my rear legs, oh how sweet those sunsets in the oasis you remember when they loosen the burden from the packsaddle and the caravan scatters and we camels feel suddenly light and you break into a run and I trot after you, overtaking you in the grove of palm trees.





III. Death




The risk we ran was living: living for ever. The threat of continuing weighed, from the very start, on anyone who had by chance begun. The crust that covers the Earth is liquid: one drop among the many thickens, grows, little by little absorbs the substances around it, it is a drop-island, gelatinous, that contracts and expands, that occupies more space at each pulsation, it’s a drop-continent that spreads its branches over the oceans, makes the poles coagulate, solidifies its mucus-green outlines on the equator, if it doesn’t stop in time it gobbles up the globe. The drop will live, only that drop, for ever, uniform and continuous in time and in space, a mucilaginous sphere with the Earth as its kernel, a gruel that contains the matter for the lives of us all, because we are all arrested in this drop that will never let us be born or die, so life will belong to it and to nobody else.

Luckily it is shattered. Each fragment is a chain of molecules arranged in a certain order, and thanks to the mere fact of having an order, it has only to float in the midst of the disordered substance and immediately around it other chains of molecules are formed, lined up in the same way. Each chain spreads order around itself, or rather it repeats itself over and over again, and the copies in turn are repeated, always in that geometrical arrangement. A solution of living crystals, all the same, covers the face of the Earth, it is born and dies in every moment without being aware of it, living a discontinuous and perpetual life, always identical to itself in a shattered time and space. Every other form remains shut out for ever; including ours.

Up to the moment when the material necessary for self-repetition shows signs of becoming scarce, and then each chain of molecules begins to collect around itself a kind of reserve supply of substances, kept in a kind of packet with everything it needs inside. This cell grows; it grows up to a certain point; it divides in two; the two cells divide into four, into eight, into sixteen; the multiplied cells instead of undulating each by itself stick to one another like colonies or shoals or polyps. The world is covered with a forest of sponges; each sponge multiplies its cells in a network of full and empty spaces which spreads out its mesh and stirs in the currents of the sea. Each cell lives on its own and, all united, they live the unity of their lives. In the winter frost the tissues of the sponge are rent, but the newer cells remain there and start dividing again, they repeat the same sponge in spring. Now we’re close to the point and the die is cast: the sea will be drunk by their pores, it will flow into their dense passages; they will live, for ever, not we, we who wait vainly for the moment to be generated by them.

But in the monstrous agglomerations of the sea’s depths, in the viscous mushroom-beds that begin to crop up from the soft crust of the emergent lands, not all the cells continue to grow superimposed on one another: every now and then a swarm breaks loose, undulates, flies, comes to rest further on; they begin to divide again, they repeat that sponge or polyp or fungus from which they came. Time now repeats itself in cycles: the phases alternate, always the same. The mushrooms scatter their spores in the wind slightly, and they grow a bit like the perishable mycelium, until other spores ripen which will die, as such, on opening. The great division within living beings has begun: the funguses that do not know death last a day and are reborn in a day, but between the part that transmits the orders of reproduction and the part that carries them out an irreconcilable gap has opened.

By now the battle is joined between those that exist and would like to be eternal and us who don’t exist and would like to, at least for a little while. Fearing that a casual mistake might open the way to diversity, those who exist increase their control devices: if the reproduction orders derive from the confrontation of two distinct and identical messages, errors of transmission are more easily eliminated. So the alternation of the phases becomes complicated: from the branches of the polyp attached to the sea-bed transparent medusas are detached, which float halfway to the surface; love among the medusas begins, ephemeral play and luxury of continuity through which the polyps confirm their eternity. On the lands that have emerged, vegetable monsters open fans of leaves, spread out mossy carpets, arch their boughs on which hermaphrodite flowers blossom; so they hope to grant death only a small and hidden part of themselves, but by now the play of crossing messages has invaded the world: that will be the breach through which the crowd of us who do not exist will make our overflowing entrance.

The sea is covered with undulating eggs; a wave lifts them, mixes them with clouds of seed. Each swimming creature that slips from a fertilized egg repeats not one but two beings that were swimming there before him; he will not be the one or the other of those two but yet another, a third; that is, the original two for the first time will die, and the third for the first time has been born.

In the invisible expanse of the programme-cells where all the combinations are formed or undone within the species, the original continuity still flows; but between one combination and another the interval is occupied by individuals who are mortal and sexed and different.

The dangers of life without death are avoided – they say – for ever. Not because from the mud of the boiling swamps the first clot of undivided life cannot again emerge, but because we are all around now – above all, those of us who act as micro-organisms and bacteria – ready to fling ourselves on that clot and devour it. Not because the chains of the viruses don’t continue repeating themselves in their exact crystalline order, but because this can happen only within our bodies and tissues, in us, the more complex animals and vegetables; so the world of the eternals has been incorporated into the world of the perishable, and their immunity to death serves to guarantee us our mortal condition. We still go swimming over depths of corals and sea anemones, we still walk and make our way through ferns and mosses under the boughs of the original forest, but sexual reproduction has now somehow entered the cycle of even the most ancient species, the spell is broken, the eternals are dead, nobody seems prepared any longer to renounce sex, even the little share of sex that falls to his lot, in order to have again a life that repeats itself interminably.

The victors – for the present – are we, the discontinuous. The swamp-forest, defeated, is still around us; we have barely opened a passage with blows of our machete in the thicket of mangrove roots; finally a glimpse of free sky opens over our heads, we raise our eyes shielding them from the Sun: above us stretches another roof, the hull of words we secrete constantly. As soon as we are out of the primordial matter, we are bound in a connective tissue that fills the hiatus between our discontinuities, between our deaths and births, a collection of signs, articulated sounds, ideograms, morphemes, numbers, punched cards, magnetic tapes, tattoos, a system of communication that includes social relations, kinship, institutions, merchandise, advertising posters, napalm bombs, namely everything that is language, in the broad sense. The danger still isn’t over. We are in a state of alarm, in the forest losing its leaves. Like a duplicate of the Earth’s crust, the cap is hardening over our heads: it will be a hostile envelope, a prison, if we don’t find the right spot to break it, to prevent its perpetual self-repetition.

The ceiling that covers us is all jutting iron gears; it’s like the belly of an automobile under which I have crawled to repair a fault, but I can’t come out from under it because, while I’m stretched out there with my back on the ground, the car expands, extends, until it covers the whole world. There is no time to lose, I must understand the mechanism, find the place where we can get to work and stop this uncontrolled process, press the buttons that guide the passage to the following phase: that of the machines that reproduce themselves through crossed male and female messages, forcing new machines to be born and the old machines to die.

Everything at a certain point tends to cling around me, even this page where my story is seeking a finale that doesn’t conclude it, a net of words where a written I and a written Priscilla meet and multiply into other words and other thoughts, where they may set into motion the chain reaction through which things done or used by men, that is, the elements of their language, can also acquire speech, where machines can speak, exchange the words by which they are constructed, the messages that cause them to move. The circuit of vital information that runs from the nucleic acids to writing is prolonged in the punched tapes of the automata, children of other automata: generations of machines, perhaps better than we, will go on living and speaking lives and words that were also ours; and translated into electronic instructions, the word ‘I’ and the word ‘Priscilla’ will meet again.





PART THREE


t zero



t zero




I have the impression this isn’t the first time I’ve found myself in this situation: with my bow just slackened in my outstretched left hand, my right hand drawn back, the arrow A suspended in midair at about a third of its trajectory, and, a bit further on, also suspended in midair, and also at about a third of his trajectory, the lion L in the act of leaping upon me, jaws agape and claws extended. In a second I’ll know if the arrow’s trajectory and the lion’s will or will not coincide at a point X crossed both by L and by A at the same second tx, that is, if the lion will slump in the air with a roar stifled by the spurt of blood that will flood his dark throat pierced by the arrow, or whether he will fall unhurt upon me knocking me to the ground with both forepaws which will lacerate the muscular tissue of my shoulders and chest, while his mouth, closing with a simple snap of the jaws, will rip my head from my neck at the level of the first vertebra.

So many and so complex are the factors that condition the parabolic movement both of arrows and of felines that I am unable for the moment to judge which of the eventualities is the more probable. I am therefore in one of those situations of uncertainty and expectation where one really doesn’t know what to think. And the thought that immediately occurs to me is this: it doesn’t seem the first time to me.

With this I don’t mean to refer to other hunting experiences of mine: an archer, the moment he thinks he’s experienced, is lost; every lion we encounter in our brief life is different from every other lion; woe to us if we stop to make comparisons, to deduce our movements from norms and premises. I am speaking of this lion L and of this arrow A which have now reached a third, roughly, of their respective trajectories.

Nor am I to be included among those who believe in the existence of a first and absolute lion, of which all the various individual and approximate lions that jump on us are only shadows or simulacra. In our hard life there is no room for anything that isn’t concrete, that can’t be grasped by the senses.

Equally alien to me is the view of those who assert that each of us carries within himself from birth a memory of lion that weighs upon his dreams, inherited by sons from fathers, and so when he sees a lion he immediately and spontaneously says: Ha, a lion! I could explain why and how I have come to exclude this idea, but this doesn’t seem to me the right moment.

Suffice it to say that by ‘lion’ I mean only this yellow clump that has sprung forth from a bush in the savannah, this hoarse grunt that exhales an odour of bloody flesh, and the white fur of the belly and the pink of the under-paws and the sharp angle of the retractile claws just as I see them over me now with a mixture of sensations that I call ‘lion’ in order to give it a name though I want it to be clear it has nothing to do with the word ‘lion’ nor even with the idea of lion which one might form in other circumstances.

If I say this moment I am living through is not being lived for the first time by me, it’s because the sensation I have of it is one of a slight doubling of images, as if at the same time I were seeing not one lion or one arrow but two or more lions and two or more arrows superimposed with a barely perceptible overlapping, so the sinuous outlines of the lion’s form and the segment of the arrow seem underlined or rather haloed by finer lines and a more delicate colour. The doubling, however, could be only an illusion through which I depict to myself an otherwise indefinable sense of thickness, whereby lion arrow bush are something more than this lion this arrow this bush, namely, the interminable repetition of lion arrow bush arranged in this specific relationship with an interminable repetition of myself in the moment when I have just slackened the string of my bow.

I wouldn’t want this sensation as I have described it, however, to resemble too much the recognition of something already seen, arrow in that position, lion in that other and reciprocal relation between the positions of arrow and of lion and of me rooted here with the bow in my hand; I would prefer to say that what I have recognized is only the space, the point of space where the arrow is which would be empty if the arrow weren’t there, the empty space which now contains the lion and the space which now contains me, as if in the void of the space we occupy or rather cross – that is, which the world occupies or rather crosses – certain points had become recognizable to me in the midst of all the other points equally empty and equally crossed by the world. And bear this in mind: it isn’t that this recognition occurs in relation, for example, to the configuration of the terrain, the distance of the river or the forest: the space that surrounds us is a space that is always different, I know this quite well, I know the Earth is a heavenly body that moves in the midst of other moving heavenly bodies, I know that no sign, on the Earth or in the sky, can serve me as an absolute point of reference, I also remember that the stars turn in the wheel of the galaxy and the galaxies move away from one another at speeds proportional to the distance. But the suspicion that has gripped me is precisely this: that I have come to find myself in a space not new to me, that I have returned to a point where we had already passed by. And since it isn’t merely a question of me but also of an arrow and a lion, it’s no good thinking this is just chance: here time is involved, which continues to cover a trail it has already followed. I could then define as time and not as space that void I felt I recognized as I crossed it.

The question I now ask myself is if a point of time’s trail can be superimposed on points of preceding passages. In this case, the impression of the images’ thickness would be explained by the repeated beating of time on an identical instant. It might also be, in certain points, an occasional slight overlapping between one passage and the next: images slightly doubled or unfocused would then be the clue that the trail of time is a little worn by use and leaves a narrow margin of play around its obligatory channels. But even if it were simply a momentary optical effect, the accent remains, as of a cadence I seem to feel beating on the instant I am living through. I still wouldn’t like what I have said to make this moment seem endowed with a special temporal consistency in the series of moments that precede it and follow it: from the point of view of time it is actually a moment that lasts as long as the others, indifferent to its content, suspended in its course between past and future; what it seems to me I’ve discovered is only its punctual recurrence in a series that is repeated, identical to itself every time.

In short, the whole problem, now that the arrow is hissing through the air and the lion arches in his spring and I still can’t tell if the arrowhead dipped in serpent’s venom will pierce the tawny skin between the widened eyes or will miss, abandoning my helpless viscera to the rending that will separate them from the framework of bones to which they are now anchored and will drag and scatter them over the bloodied, dusty ground until before night the vultures and the jackals will have erased the last trace, the whole problem for me is to know if the series of which this second is a part is open or closed. Because if, as I seem to have heard maintained sometimes, it is a finite series, that is if the universe’s time began at a certain moment and continues in an explosion of stars and nebulae, more and more rarefied, until the moment when the dispersion will reach the extreme limit and stars and nebulae will start concentrating again, the consequence I must draw is that time will retrace its steps, that the chain of minutes will unroll in the opposite direction, until we are back at the beginning, only to start over again, and all of this will occur infinite times – and it may just be, then, that time did have a beginning: the universe does nothing but pulsate between two extreme moments, forced to repeat itself for ever – just as it has already repeated itself infinite times and just as this second where I now find myself is repeated.

Let’s try to look at it all clearly, then: I find myself in a random space-time intermediary point of a phase of the universe; after hundreds of millions of billions of seconds here the arrow and the lion and I and the bush have found ourselves as we now find ourselves, and this second will be promptly swallowed up and buried in the series of the hundreds of millions of billions of seconds that continues, independently of the outcome, a second from now, of the convergent or divergent flight of the lion and of the arrow; then at a certain point the course will reverse its direction, the universe will repeat its vicissitude backwards, from the effects the causes will punctually arise, so also from these effects I am waiting for and don’t know, from an arrow that ploughs into the ground raising a yellow cloud of dust and tiny fragments of flint or else which pierces the palate of the beast like a new, monstrous tooth, we’ll come back to the moment I am now living, the arrow returning to fit itself to the taut bow as if sucked back, the lion falling again behind the bush on his rear legs tensed like a spring, and all the afterwards will gradually be erased second by second by the return of the before, it will be forgotten in the dispersal of billions of combinations of neurons within the lobes of brains, so that no one will know he’s living in reversed time just as I myself am not now sure in which direction the time I move in is moving, and if the then I’m waiting for hasn’t in reality already happened just a second ago, bearing with it my salvation or my death.

What I ask myself is whether, seeing that at this point we have to go back in any case, it wouldn’t be wise for me to stop, to stop in space and in time, while the string of the barely slackened bow bends in the direction opposite to the one where it was previously tautened, and while my right foot barely lightened of the weight of the body is lifted in a ninety-degree twist, and to let it be motionless like that to wait until, from the darkness of space-time, the lion emerges again and sets himself against me with all four legs in the air, and the arrow goes back to its place in its trajectory at the exact point where it is now. What, after all, is the use of continuing if sooner or later we will only find ourselves in this situation again? I might as well grant myself a few dozen billion years’ repose, and let the rest of the universe continue its spatial and temporal race to the end, and wait for the return trip to jump on again and go back in my story and the universe’s to the origin, and then begin once more to find myself here – or else let time go back by itself and let it approach me again while I stand still and wait – and then see if the right moment has come for me to make up my mind and take the next step, to go and have a look at what will happen to me in a second, or on the other hand if it’s best for me to remain here definitively. For this there is no need for my material particles to be removed from their spatio-temporal course, from the bloody ephemeral victory of the hunter or of the lion: I’m sure that in any case a part of us remains entangled with each single intersection of time and space, and therefore it would be enough not to separate ourselves from this part, to identify with it, letting the rest go on turning as it must turn to the end.

In short, I am offered this possibility: to constitute a fixed point in the oscillating phases of the universe. Shall I seize the opportunity or is it best to skip it? As far as stopping goes, I might well stop not just myself, which I realize wouldn’t make much sense, but stop along with me what serves to define this moment for me, arrow lion archer suspended just as we are, for ever. It seems to me in fact that if the lion knew clearly how things stand, he too would surely agree to remain where he is now, at about a third of the trajectory of his furious leap, to separate himself from that self-projection which in another second will encounter the rigid jerks of the death agony or the angry crunching of a still-warm human skull. I can speak therefore not only for myself, but also in the name of the lion. And in the name of the arrow, because an arrow can wish for nothing but to be an arrow as it is in this rapid moment, postponing its destiny as blunted scrap which awaits it whichever target it may strike.

Having established, then, that the situation in which we now find ourselves, lion arrow and I in this moment t0, will occur twice for each coming and going of time, identical to the other times, and that it has been so repeated as often as the universe has repeated its diastole and its systole in the past – if it really makes sense to speak of past and future for the succession of these phases, when we know that it doesn’t make sense within the phases – an uncertainty still remains about the situation in the successive seconds t1 t2, t3, et cetera, just as things were uncertain in the preceding t-1, t-2, t-3, et cetera.

The alternatives, on closer examination, are these:

either the space-time lines that the universe follows in the phases of its pulsation coincide at every point;

or else they coincide only in certain exceptional points, such as the second I am now living in, diverging then in the others.

If the latter of these alternatives is correct, from the space-time point where I now am there extends a bundle of possibilities which, the more they proceed in time, the more they diverge, cone-like, towards futures which are completely different from one another, and each time I find myself here with the arrow and the lion in the air will correspond to a different point X of intersection in their trajectories, each time the lion will be wounded in a different way, he will have a different agony or will find to a different extent new strength to react, or he won’t be wounded at all and will fling himself upon me each time in a different way leaving me possibilities of self-defence or not leaving them, and my victories and my defeats in the struggle with the lion prove to be potentially infinite, so the more times I am disembowelled the more probabilities I’ll have of hitting the target the next time I find myself here billions and billions of years later, thus I can express no opinion on this present situation of mine because in the event that I am living the fraction of time immediately preceding the clawing of the beast this would be the last moment of a happy period, whereas if what awaits me is the triumph with which the tribe welcomes the victorious lion hunter, what I’m now living is the climax of anguish, the blackest point of the descent to hell which I must make in order to deserve the coming apotheosis. Therefore it’s best for me to flee from this situation whatever may be in store for me, because if there’s one interval of time that really counts for nothing it’s this very moment, definable only in relation to what follows it, that is to say this second in itself doesn’t exist, and so there is no possibility not only of staying in it but even of crossing it for the duration of a second, in short it is a jump of time between the moment in which the lion and the arrow took flight and the moment when a spurt of blood will burst from the lion’s veins or from mine.

Consider, too, that if from this second infinite lines of possible futures move out in a cone, the same lines arrive obliquely from a past that is also a cone of infinite possibilities, therefore the I who is now here with the lion plunging on him from above and with the arrow cutting its way through the air is a different I every time because past mother father tribe language age experience are different each time, the lion is always another lion even if I see him just like this each time, with his tail which has curved in the leap till the tuft is near the right flank in a movement that could be a lash or a caress, with the mane so open that it covers a great part of the breast and the torso from my sight and allows only the forepaws to emerge laterally raised as if preparing for me a joyous embrace but in reality ready to plunge the claws in my shoulders with all their strength, and the arrow is made of material that is always different, tipped with different heads, poisoned by dissimilar serpents, though always crossing the air in the same parabola and with the same hiss. What doesn’t change is the relation between me arrow lion in this moment of uncertainty which is repeated exactly, an uncertainty whose stake is death, but we must agree that if this menacing death is the death of a me with a different past, of a me that yesterday morning didn’t go out to gather roots with my girl cousin, that is rightly speaking another me, a stranger, perhaps a stranger who yesterday morning went gathering roots with my girl cousin, therefore an enemy, in any case if here in my place the other times instead of me there was somebody else, it doesn’t then matter much to know if the time before or the time after the arrow struck the lion or not.

In this case, then, it’s out of the question that stopping in t0 for the whole cycle of space and time could have any interest for me. However, the other hypothesis still remains: as in the old geometry lines had only to coincide in two points to coincide in all, so it may be that the spatio-temporal lines drawn by the universe in its alternating phases coincide in all their points and therefore not only t0 but also t1 and t2 and everything that will come afterwards will coincide with the respective t1t2t3 of the other phases, and likewise all the preceding and following seconds, and I will be reduced to having a sole past and a sole future repeated infinite times before and after this moment. One might, however, wonder whether there is any sense in speaking of repetition when time consists in a single series of points not allowing variations in their nature or in their succession: it would then suffice to say that time is finite and always equal to itself, and can thus be considered as given contemporaneously in all its extent forming a pile of layers of present; in other words, we have a time that is absolutely full, since each of the moments into which it can be broken down constitutes a kind of layer that stays there continuously present, inserted among other layers also continuously present. In short, the second t0 in which we have the arrow A0 and a bit further on the lion L0 and here the me Q0 is a space-time layer that remains motionless and identical for ever, and next to it there is placed t1 with the arrow A1 and the lion L1 and the me Q1 who have slightly changed their positions, and beside that there is t2 which contains A2 and L2 and Q2 and so on. In one of these seconds placed in line it is clear who lives and who dies between the lion Ln and the me Qn, and in the following seconds there are surely taking place either the tribe’s festivities for the hunter who returns with the lion’s remains or the funeral of the hunter as through the savannah spreads the terror of the prowling murderous lion. Each second is definitive, closed, without interferences from the others, and I, Q0, here in my territory t0 can be absolutely calm and take no interest in what is simultaneously happening to Q1Q2Q3Qn in the respective seconds near mine, because in reality the lions L1L2L3Ln can never take the place of the familiar and still-inoffensive though menacing L0, held at bay by an arrow in flight A0 still containing in itself that mortal power that might prove wasted by A1A2A3An in their arrangement in segments of the trajectory more and more distant from the target, ridiculing me as the most clumsy archer of the tribe, or rather ridiculing as clumsy that Q-n who in t-n takes aim with his bow.

I know the comparison with the frames of a movie film emerges spontaneously, but if I’ve avoided using it so far you can be sure I’ve had my reasons. It’s true that each second is closed in itself and incommunicable with the others exactly as in a film frame, but to define its content the points Q0L0A0 are not enough: with them we would limit it to a little lion-hunting scene, dramatic if you like but surely not displaying a very broad horizon; what must be considered contemporaneously is the totality of the points contained in the universe in that second t0 not excluding even one, and then it’s best to put the film frame right out of your head because it just confuses things.

So now that I have decided to inhabit for ever this second t0 – and if I hadn’t decided to it would be the same thing because as Q0 I can inhabit no other – I have ample leisure to look around and to contemplate my second to its full extent. It encompasses on my right a river blackish with hippopotamuses, on my left the savannah blackish-white with zebras, and scattered at various points along the horizon some baobab trees blackish-yellow with toucans, each of these elements marked by the positions occupied respectively by the hippopotamuses H(a) 0, H(b) 0, H(c) 0 et cetera, by the zebras Z(a) 0, Z(b) 0, Z(c) 0 et cetera, the toucans T(a) 0, T(b) 0, T(c) 0 et cetera. It further embraces hut villages and warehouses of importers and exporters, plantations that conceal underground thousands of seeds at different moments of the process of germination, endless deserts with the position of each grain of sand G(a) 0, G(b) 0… G(nn) 0 transported by the wind, cities at night with lighted windows and dark windows, cities during the day with red and yellow and green traffic lights, production graphs, price indices, stock market figures, epidemics of contagious diseases with the position of each virus, local wars with volleys of bullets B(a) 0B(b) 0… B(z) 0B(zz) 0B(zzz) 0… suspended in their trajectory, bullets which may strike the enemies E(a) 0E(b) 0E(c) 0 hidden among the leaves, aeroplanes with clusters of just-released bombs suspended beneath them, aeroplanes with clusters of bombs waiting to be released, total war implicit in the international situation (IS) 0 which at some unknown moment (IS)X will become explicit total war, explosions of supernovae which might change radically the configuration of our galaxy …

Each second is a universe, the second I live is the second I live in, la seconde que je vis c’est la seconde où je demeure, I must get used to conceiving my speech simultaneously in all possible languages if I want to live my universe-instant extensively. Through the combination of all contemporaneous data I could achieve an objective knowledge of the universe-instant t0 in all its spatial extension, me included, since inside t0 I, Q0, am not in the least determined by my past Q-1 Q-2 Q-3 et cetera but by the system composed of all the toucans T0, bullets B0, viruses V0, without which the fact that I am Q0 could not be established. For that matter, since I no longer have to worry about what will happen to Q1 Q2 Q3 et cetera, there’s no use in my assuming the subjective point of view that has guided me so far, now I can identify myself with myself as well as with the lion or with the grain of sand or the cost-of-living index or with the enemy or with the enemy’s enemy.

To do this I must establish exactly the co-ordinates of all these points and I must calculate certain constants. I could for example emphasize all the components of suspense and uncertainty that obtain both for me and for the lion the arrow the bombs the enemy and the enemy’s enemy, and define t0 as a moment of universal suspense and uncertainty. But this still tells me nothing substantial about t0 because granted it is indeed a terrifying moment as I believe is now proved, it could also be just one terrifying moment in a series of moments of mounting terror or equally a terrifying moment in a series of decreasing and therefore illusory terror. In other words this established but relative terror of t0 can assume completely different values, since t1t2t3 can transform the substance of t0 in a radical manner, or to put it more clearly there are the various t1’s of Q1, L1, E(a) 1, E(I/a) 1 which have the power to determine the fundamental qualities of t0.

And here, it seems to me, things start becoming complicated: my line of conduct is to close myself in t0 and to know nothing of what happens outside of this second, giving up a limited personal point of view in order to live t0 in all its global objective configuration, but this objective configuration can be grasped not from within to but only by observing it from another universe-instant, for example from t1 or from t2, and not from all their extension contemporaneously but by adopting decisively one point of view, that of the enemy or of the enemy’s enemy, that of the lion or that of myself.

To sum up: to stay in t0 I must establish an objective configuration of t0; to establish an objective configuration of t0; to must move to t1; to move into t1 I must adopt some kind of subjective viewpoint so I might as well keep my own. To sum up further: to stay still in time I must move with time, to become objective I must remain subjective.

Now let’s see how I must behave practically: it remains established that I as Q0 retain my residence in t0, but I could meanwhile make the quickest possible dash into t1 and if that isn’t enough proceed on to t2 and t3, identifying myself temporarily with Q1 Q2 Q3, all this naturally in the hope that the Q series continues and isn’t prematurely cut off by the curved claws of L1 L2 L3, because only in this way could I realize how my position of Q0 in t0 is really constituted which is the only thing that should matter to me.

But the danger I risk is that the content of t1, of the universe-instant t1, is so much more interesting, so much richer than t0, in emotions and surprises either triumphant or disastrous, that I might be tempted to devote myself entirely to t1, turning my back on t0, forgetting that I had moved to t1 only to gain more information on t0. And in this curiosity about t1, in this illegitimate desire for knowledge about a universe-instant that isn’t mine, in wanting to discover if I would really be making a good bargain trading my stable and secure citizenship of t0 for that modicum of novelty that t1 could offer me, I might take a step into t2 just to have a more objective notion of t1; and that step into t2 might, in turn …

If this is how things stand I realize that my situation won’t change in the least even if I abandon the hypotheses from which I set out: that is, supposing time knows no repetitions and consists of an irreversible series of seconds each different from the other, and each second happens once and for all, and living in it for its exact length of one second means living in it for ever, and t0 interests me only with regard to the t1 t2 t3’s that follow it with their content of life or death in consequence of the movement I performed in shooting the arrow and the movement that the lion performed in making his leap and also of the other movements the lion and I will make in the next seconds and of the fear that for the whole duration of an interminable second keeps me petrified and keeps petrified the lion in midair and the arrow in my sight and the second t0 swift as it came now swiftly clicks into the following second and traces with no further doubts the trajectory of the lion and of the arrow …





The Chase




That car that is chasing me is faster than mine; inside there is one man, alone, armed with a pistol, a good shot, as I have seen from the bullets which missed me by fractions of an inch. In my escape I have headed for the centre of the city; it was a healthy decision; the pursuer is constantly behind me but we are separated by several other cars; we have stopped at a traffic signal, in a long column.

The signal is regulated in such a way that on our side the red light lasts a hundred and eighty seconds and the green light a hundred and twenty, no doubt based on the premise that the perpendicular traffic is heavier and slower. A mistaken premise: calculating the cars I see going by transversely when it is green for them, I would say they are about twice the number of those that in an equally long period manage to break free of our column and pass the signal. This doesn’t mean that, once beyond it, they speed: in reality they go on forward with exasperating slowness, which can be considered speed only compared to us since we are virtually motionless with red and green alike. It is also partially the fault of this slowness of theirs that we don’t succeed in moving, because when the green goes off for them and comes on for us the intersection is still occupied by their wave, blocked there in the centre, and thus at least thirty of our hundred and twenty seconds are lost before a single tyre can revolve once here on our side. It must be said that the transverse flow does indeed inflict this delay on us but then it is compensated for by a loss of forty and sometimes sixty seconds before starting again when the green comes on once more for them, thanks to the trail of traffic jams that each of our slow waves drags after it: a loss for them which doesn’t actually mean a gain for us because every final delay on our side (and initial delay on the other) corresponds to a greater final delay on the other side (and initial on ours), and this in mounting proportion, so that the green light period remains a deadlock for a longer and longer time on both sides, and this deadlock works more against our progress than theirs.

I realize that when, in this description, I oppose ‘us’ and ‘them’ I include in the term ‘us’ both myself and the man who is chasing me in order to kill me, as if the boundary line of enmity passed not between me and him but rather between those in our column and those in the transverse one. But for all who are here immobilized and impatient, with their feet on the clutch, thoughts and feelings can follow no other course but the one imposed by the respective situations in the currents of traffic; it is therefore admissible to suppose that a community of intention is established between me, who cannot wait to dash away, and him who is waiting for a repetition of his previous opportunity, when in a street on the city’s outskirts he managed to fire at me two shots that missed me by sheerest luck, since one bullet shattered the glass of the left side window and the other lodged here in the roof.

It should be added that the community implied in the term ‘us’ is only apparent, because in practice my enmity extends not only to the cars that cross our column but also those in it; and inside our column I feel definitely more hostile towards the cars that precede me and prevent me from advancing than towards those following me, which, however, would make themselves declared enemies if they tried to pass me, a difficult undertaking in view of the dense jam where every car is stuck fast among the others with a minimum freedom of movement.

In short, the man who at this moment is my mortal enemy is now lost among many other solid bodies where my chafing aversion and fear are also perforce distributed, just as his murderous will though directed exclusively against me is somehow scattered and deflected among a great number of intermediary objects. It is certain in any case that he too, in the calculations he is making simultaneously with me, calls our column ‘us’ and calls ‘them’ the column that crosses ours, just as it is certain that our calculations, though aiming finally at opposite results, have many elements and developments in common.

I want our column to have first a fast movement, then a very slow one, or in other words that the cars in front of me should suddenly start speeding and then after them I too could pass the intersection on the last flicker of green; so then immediately behind my back the line would be blocked for a period of time long enough to allow me to vanish, turn off into a secondary cross street. In all likelihood my pursuer’s calculations tend instead to foresee whether he will manage to pass the signal in the same wave with me, if he will succeed in keeping behind me until the cars that separate us are scattered in various directions or at least more thinned out, and if his car will then be able to take its place immediately behind or beside mine, for example in the column at another signal, in a good position to empty his pistol at me (I am unarmed) a second before the green comes on to give him a clear avenue of escape.

In other words, I am relying on the irregularity with which the column’s periods of immobility alternate with periods of movement; he on the other hand is counting on the regularity which can be found on an average between periods of movement and periods of immobility for each automobile in the column. The problem then is whether the column is divisible into a series of segments each endowed with a life of its own or whether it must be considered a single indivisible body where the only change one can hope for is a decrease in density as the hours of night approach, to an extreme of rarefaction where only our two cars will remain headed in the same direction and the distance will tend to disappear … What our calculations surely have in common is that in both of them the elements that determine the individual motion of our automobiles – power of the respective motors and ability of the drivers – count almost for nothing now, and what decides everything is the general movement of the column, or rather the combined movement of the various columns that intersect one another in the city. In short, I and the man commissioned to kill me are as if immobilized in a space that moves on its own, we are soldered to this pseudo-space which breaks up and re-forms and on whose combinations our fate depends.

To evade this situation the simplest method would be to get out of the car. If one or both of us left our automobiles and proceeded on foot, then space would exist again and the possibility of our moving in space. But we are in a street where parking is forbidden; we would have to leave the cars in the midst of the traffic (both his and mine are stolen cars, destined to be abandoned at random when they are no longer of use to us); I could slip away on all fours among the automobiles to keep from exposing myself to his aim, but such an escape would attract attention and I would immediately have the police on my heels. Now I not only cannot seek the protection of the police, but I must also avoid in every way arousing their curiosity; so obviously I mustn’t get out of my car even if he leaves his.

My first fear, the moment we found ourselves trapped here, was of seeing him come forward on foot, alone and free in the midst of hundreds of people nailed to their wheels, calmly reviewing the row of cars and, on reaching mine, firing at me whatever bullets remain in his magazine, then running off and escaping. My fears were not unfounded: in the rear-view mirror I was not long in seeing the form of my pursuer extending from the half-open door of his car and stretching his neck above the expanse of metal roofs like someone trying to understand the reason for such an unnaturally prolonged stop; indeed, after a little while I saw his slender figure slip from the vehicle, move a few steps crosswise among the cars. But at that moment the column stirred in one of its intermittent hints of movement; from the line behind his empty car an angry honking rose, and already drivers and passengers were jumping out yelling and making threatening gestures. Certainly they would have chased him and brought him back by force to bend his head over the wheel if he hadn’t hastened to resume his seat and put the car in gear, allowing the rest of the line to benefit from the new step forward, short as it was. On this score I can rest assured then: we cannot separate ourselves from our cars, not for a single moment, my pursuer will never dare overtake me on foot because even if he were in time to shoot me he couldn’t then elude the fury of the other drivers, ready perhaps even to lynch him, not so much for the homicide in itself as for the traffic jam the two cars – his and the dead man’s – would cause, stopped in the middle of the street.

I try to explore every hypothesis because the more details I can foresee the more probabilities I have of saving myself. For that matter what else could I do? We aren’t moving, not an inch. So far I have considered the column as a linear continuum or else as a fluid current where the individual automobiles flow in disorder. The moment has come to make it clear that in our column the cars are arranged side by side in three lanes and that the alternation of periods of immobility and of movement in each of the three does not correspond with the other two, so that there are moments when only the right-hand line goes forward, or else the centre line which is in fact the line where both I and my potential murderer are. If I have neglected such an outstanding element so far it isn’t only because the three lines have gradually come to a regular arrangement and I myself was late in noticing it, but also because in reality this fact doesn’t modify the situation for better or for worse. Certainly the difference in speed among the various lines would be decisive if the pursuer at a certain point could, for example advancing with the right-hand line, bring his car up beside mine, shoot, and continue on his way. This, however, is also an eventuality that can be excluded: even admitting that from the centre line he might manage to force his way into one of the side lines (the cars proceed almost with their bumpers touching but if you know how you can exploit the moment when a little interval opens in the next line between a nose and a tail and can stick your own nose in without minding the protests of dozens of horns), keeping my eye on him in my rear-view mirror I would notice his manoeuvre before it was completed and I would have plenty of time, given the distance between us, to find a hasty solution with a similar move. I could, that is, slip into the same line, left or right, where he had moved, and thus I would go on preceding him at the same speed; or else I could shift my position to the outside line on the other side, if he moved to the left I could go to the right, and then we would be separated not only by a distance in the direction of traffic but also by a latitudinal division which would immediately become an insuperable barrier.

Let’s assume in any case that we could finally be abreast in two adjacent lines; shooting at me isn’t just something that he could do at any moment, without risking being blocked in the line waiting for the police with a corpse at the wheel of the neighbouring car. Before the opportunity arose for rapid safe actions the pursuer would have to stick to my side for God knows how long; and in the meanwhile since the relative speeds of the various lines change irregularly our cars would not stay long at the same level; I could regain my advantage and that wouldn’t be too bad because we would go back to our previous position; the greatest risk for my pursuer would be for his line to advance while mine remained behind.

With the pursuer preceding me, I would no longer be pursued. And I could also, to make my new situation conclusive, move into his same line, putting a certain number of cars between him and me. He would be forced to follow the stream, with no possibility of reversing his direction, and by falling in behind him I would be definitively safe. At the signal, seeing him go in one direction, I would take the other, and we would be separated for ever.

Anyway, all these hypothetical manoeuvres should take into account the fact that, on reaching the signal, those in the right-hand line are obliged to turn right, and those in the left, to turn left (the jam at the intersection allows no second thoughts), whereas those in the centre are able at the last moment to choose what they want to do. This is the real reason why both he and I are quite careful not to leave the centre line: I want to retain my freedom of choice to the last minute, he wants to be ready to turn in the direction where he sees I have turned.

Suddenly I feel gripped by a gust of enthusiasm: we are really the most alert, my pursuer and I, having placed ourselves in the centre line. It’s wonderful to know that freedom still exists and at the same time to feel oneself surrounded and protected by a blockade of solid and impenetrable bodies, and to have no concern beyond raising the left foot from the clutch, pressing the right foot on the accelerator for an instant and immediately raising it and lowering the left again on the clutch, actions which above all are not decided by us but dictated by the traffic’s general pace.

I am experiencing a moment of well-being and optimism. Basically our movement is equivalent to all other movement, that is, it consists in occupying the space before us and in causing it to flow behind us, and so the moment an empty space is formed in front of me I occupy it, otherwise somebody else would hasten to occupy it; the only possible action on space is the negation of space, I negate it the moment it gives a sign of forming and then I allow it to be formed again behind me where there is immediately somebody else who negates it. In short, this space is never seen and perhaps it doesn’t exist, it is only an extension of objects and a measure of distances, the distance between me and my pursuer consists in the number of cars in the line between me and him, and since this number is constant our pursuit is only a pursuit after a manner of speaking, just as it would be difficult to establish that two travellers seated in two coaches of the same train are pursuing each other.

If, however, the number of these interval-cars were to increase or diminish, then our pursuit would once again be a real pursuit, independently of our speeds or our freedom of movement. Now I must once again pay close attention: both eventualities have some likelihood of taking place. Between the position where I am now and the intersection controlled by the signal I notice that a secondary street debouches, almost an alley, from which comes a thin but steady trickle of cars. It would suffice for some of these incoming cars to be inserted between me and him, and immediately my separation would increase, it would be as if I had spurted forward in sudden flight. On our left, instead, in the middle of the street a narrow island set aside for parking now begins; if there are free places or if places become free it would suffice for some of the interval-cars to decide to park and then all of a sudden my pursuer would find the distance separating us shortened.

I must discover a solution in a hurry, and since the only field open to me is the field of theory, I can only go on extending my theoretical knowledge of the situation. Reality, ugly or beautiful as it may be, is something I cannot change: that man has been given the job of overtaking me and killing me, whereas I have been told I can do nothing but run away; these instructions remain valid even in the event that space is abolished in one or in all of its dimensions whereby motion would remain impossible; this doesn’t mean I would stop being the pursued or he the pursuer.

I must bear in mind at the same time two types of relationship: on one hand the system that includes all the vehicles simultaneously moving in the centre of a city where the total surface of the automobiles equals and perhaps exceeds the total surface of the streets; on the other hand the system created between an armed pursuer and an unarmed pursued man. Now these two types of relationship tend to become identified in the sense that the second is contained in the first as in a recipient which gives it its form and makes it invisible, so that an outside observer is unable to distinguish in the river of identical cars the two which are involved in a lethal pursuit, in a mad race that is hidden within this unbearable stasis.

Let’s try to examine each element calmly: a pursuit should consist in the confrontation of the speeds of two bodies moving in space, but since we have seen that a space does not exist independently of the bodies that occupy it, the pursuit will consist only in a series of variations in the relative positions of such bodies. It is the bodies therefore that determine the surrounding space, and if this affirmation seems to contradict both my experience and my pursuer’s – since the two of us can’t determine anything at all, neither space to flee in nor space to pursue in – it is because we are dealing with a property not of single bodies but of the whole complex of bodies in their reciprocal relationships, in their moments of initiative and of indecision, of starting the motor, in their flashing of lights and honking and biting nails and constant angry shifts of gear: neutral, first, second, neutral; neutral, first, second, neutral …

Now that we have abolished the concept of space (I think my pursuer in these periods of waiting must also have reached the same conclusions as I) and now that the concept of motion no longer implies the continuous passage of a body through a series of points but only disconnected and irregular displacements of bodies that occupy this point or that, perhaps I will succeed in accepting more patiently the slowness of the line, because what counts is the relative space that is defined and transformed around my car as around every other car in this traffic jam. In short, each car is in the centre of a system of relationships which in practice is the equivalent of another, that is, the cars are interchangeable, I mean the cars each with its driver inside; each driver could perfectly well change places with another driver, I with my neighbours and my pursuer with his.

In these shifts of position preferred directions can be discerned locally: for example our line’s direction of movement, which even if it doesn’t really imply it is moving nevertheless excludes the possibility that one can move in the opposite direction. For us two, then, the direction of pursuit is the preferred one, in fact the only exchange of positions that cannot take place is an exchange between us, or any other exchange in contradiction with our chase. This demonstrates that in this world of interchangeable appearances the pursuer-pursued relationship continues to be the only reality we can rely on.

The point is this: if every car – direction of movement and direction of pursuit remaining constant – is equal to every other car, the properties of any one car can also be attributed to the others. Therefore nothing rules out the possibility that these lines of cars are all formed of cars being pursued, that each of these cars is fleeing as I am fleeing the threat of an aimed pistol in any one of the cars that follow. Nor can I exclude the further possibility that each car is pursuing another car with homicidal intentions, and that all of a sudden the centre of the city will be transformed into a battlefield or the scene of a massacre. Whether this is true or not, the behaviour of the cars around me would be no different from what it is now, therefore I am entitled to insist on my hypothesis and to follow the relative positions of any two cars in their various moments, attributing to one the role of the pursued and to the other that of the pursuer. Above all, it is a game that can serve very well to while away the waiting: I have only to interpret every change of position in the lines as an episode in a hypothetical pursuit. For example, now as one of the interval-cars starts indicating left because it has seen a free space in the parking island, instead of being concerned only with my advantage which is about to be reduced, I can very easily think this is a manoeuvre in another pursuit, the move of one pursued or of one pursuer among the countless others who surround me, and thus the situation in which so far I have lived subjectively, nailed to my solitary fear, is projected outside me, extended to the general system of which we are all parts.

This isn’t the first time that an interval-car has abandoned its place; on one side the parking area and on the other the right-hand line, slightly faster, seem to exercise a strong attraction on the automobiles behind me. As I have continued following the thread of my deductions, the relative space that surrounds me has undergone various changes: at a certain point even my pursuer moved to the right and, exploiting an advance of that line, passed a couple of cars in the central line; then I moved to the right, too; he went back into the central line and I too went back to the centre, but I had to drop one car behind whereas he moved forward three. These are all things that before would have made me very uneasy, whereas now they interest me chiefly as special elements in the general system of pursuits whose properties I am trying to establish.

On thinking it over, I deduce that if all the cars are involved in pursuits, the pursuing property would have to be commutative, and anyone who pursues would have to be in his turn pursued and anyone who is pursued would also be pursuing. Among the cars, then, a uniformity and symmetry of relationships would be achieved, where the only difficult element to determine would be the pursued-pursuer interval in each chain of pursuits. In fact this interval could be perhaps twenty cars or perhaps forty, or else none, as – from what I see in the mirror – is now my case: at this very moment my pursuer has gained the position directly behind mine.

I should therefore consider myself defeated and admit that I now have left only a few minutes to live, unless in developing my hypothesis I can come upon some saving solution. For example, let’s suppose the car pursuing me has behind it a chain of pursuing cars: exactly one second before my pursuer shoots, the pursuer of my pursuer could overtake him and kill him, saving my life. But if two seconds before that happened the pursuer of my pursuer were overtaken and killed by his pursuer, my pursuer would then be saved and free to kill me. A perfect system of pursuits should be based on a simple concatenation of functions: each pursuer has the job of preventing the pursuer ahead of him from shooting his victim, and he has one single means of doing this, namely, by shooting him. The whole problem then lies in knowing at which link the chain will break, because starting from the point where one pursuer succeeds in killing another, then the following pursuer, no longer having to prevent that homicide since it has already been committed, will give up the idea of shooting, and the pursuer who comes after him will have no further reason for shooting since the murder he was to prevent will no longer take place, and thus going back along the chain there will be no more pursued or pursuers.

But if I admit the existence of a chain of pursuits behind me there is no reason why this chain should not also continue through me into the part of the line that precedes me. Now that the signal is turning green and it is probable that in this very period of free movement I can succeed in pushing my way into the intersection where my fate will be decided, I realize the decisive element is not behind me but in my relationship with the man ahead of me. So the only significant alternative is whether my condition of pursued man is destined to remain terminal and asymmetrical (which would seem proved by the fact that in the relationship with my pursuer I am unarmed) or if I too in my turn am a pursuer. If I examine the data of the question more closely one of the hypotheses that occurs is this: I may have been given the assignment of killing a person but not the possibility of using weapons against anyone else for whatever reason: in this case I would be armed only for my victim and disarmed for all the others.

To discover if this hypothesis corresponds to the truth, I have only to extend my hand: if in the glove compartment of my car there is a pistol it is a sign that I too am a pursuer. I have time to check this: I have been unable to take advantage of the green light because the car ahead of me was blocked by the diagonal flow and now the red light has come on again. The perpendicular flow resumes; the car preceding me is in a nasty position, having passed the line of the signal; the driver turns to see if he can back up, he sees me, has an expression of terror. He is the enemy whom I have hunted through all the city and whom I have patiently followed in this long slow line. My right hand, gripping the pistol with its silencer, rests on the gearshift. In the little mirror I see my pursuer aiming at me.

The green comes on, I put the car into gear, racing the engine, I pull down hard with my left hand and at the same time I raise my right to the window and I shoot. The man I was pursuing slumps over the wheel. The man who was pursuing me lowers his pistol, now useless. I have already turned into the cross street. Absolutely nothing has changed: the line moves in little, irregular shifts of position, I am still prisoner of the general system of moving cars, where neither pursuers nor pursued can be distinguished.





The Night Driver




As soon as I am outside the city I realize night has fallen. I turn on my headlights. I am driving from A to B, along a three-lane motorway, the kind where the centre lane is used for passing in both directions. For night driving our eyes, too, must remove one kind of inner transparency and fit on another, because they no longer have to make an effort to distinguish among the shadows and the fading colours of the evening landscape the little speck of the distant cars which are coming towards us or preceding us, but they have to check a kind of black slate which requires a different method of reading, more precise but also simplified, since the darkness erases all the picture’s details which might be distracting and underlines only the indispensable elements, the white stripes on the asphalt, the headlights’ yellow glow and the little red dots. It’s a process that occurs automatically, and if I am led to reflect on it this evening it’s because now that the external possibilities of distraction diminish, the internal ones get the upper hand within me, and my thoughts race on their own in a circuit of alternatives and doubts I can’t disengage; in other words, I have to make a special effort to concentrate on my driving.

I climbed into the car suddenly, after a quarrel over the telephone with Y. I live in A, Y lives in B. I wasn’t planning to visit her this evening. But during our daily phone call we said dire things to each other; in the end, carried away by my exasperation, I told Y that I wanted to break off our affair; Y answered that it didn’t matter to her and that she would immediately telephone Z, my rival. At this point one of us – I don’t remember whether it was she or I – hung up. Before a minute had passed I realized the motive of our quarrel was trifling compared to the consequences it was creating. To call Y back on the telephone would have been a mistake; the only way to resolve the question was to dash over to B and have a face-to-face explanation with her. So here I am on this motorway I have driven over hundreds of times at every hour in every season but which never seemed so long to me before.

Or, to put it more clearly, I feel as if I had lost all sense of space and of time: the glowing cones projected by the headlights make the outlines of places sink into vagueness; the numbers of the miles on the signs and the numbers that click over on the dashboard are data that mean nothing to me, that do not respond to the urgency of my questions about what Y is doing at this moment, about what she is thinking. Did she really mean to call Z or was it only a threat, blurted out like that, out of pique? And if she was serious, did she do it immediately after our telephone conversation, or is she thinking it over for a moment, letting her anger subside before she makes up her mind? Like me, Z lives in A; for years he has loved Y hopelessly; if she has telephoned him and invited him over, he has surely set out at top speed towards B in his car; therefore he too is speeding along this motorway; every car that passes me could be his, as well as every car I pass. It is difficult to be certain: the cars going in the same direction as mine are two red lights when they precede me and two yellow eyes when I see them following me in my rear-view mirror. At the moment of passing I can make out at most what kind of car it is and how many people are inside it, but the cars carrying only their driver are the great majority, and as far as the model is concerned I don’t believe Z’s automobile is particularly recognizable.

As if that weren’t enough, it’s begun to rain. My field of vision is reduced to the semicircle of glass swept by the windscreen wiper, all the rest is streaked or opaque darkness, the information I receive from outside consists only of yellow and red flashes distorted by a tumult of drops. The only thing I can do with Z is try to pass him and not let him pass me, in whatever car he is, but I won’t be able to know if he is here and which car is his. I feel all the cars heading towards B are equally hostile: every car faster than mine that knocks on my mirror insistently with its indicator asking me to give way causes me a pang of jealousy; and every time I see ahead of me the distance diminish between me and the rear lights of a rival, with an upsurge of triumph I hurl myself into the centre lane to reach Y before him.

Only a few minutes’ advantage would be enough for me: seeing how promptly I have rushed to her, Y will immediately forget the causes of our quarrel; everything between us will again be as it was before; when Z arrives he will realize he was called into question only because of a kind of game between the two of us; he’ll feel he’s an intruder. Or perhaps Y at this moment has already regretted everything she said to me, has tried to call me back on the phone, or else she, like me, has decided the best thing was to come in person and has got into her car and is now racing in the direction opposite mine along this motorway.

Now I have stopped paying attention to the cars going in my direction and I keep looking at those coming towards me which for me consist only in a double star of headlights which dilates until it sweeps the darkness from my field of vision then suddenly disappears behind me dragging a kind of underwater luminescence after it. Y’s car is a very common model; like mine, for that matter. Each of these luminous apparitions could be Y speeding towards me, at each one I feel my blood stir as if in an intimacy destined to remain secret, the amorous message addressed exclusively to me is mingled with all the other messages speeding along the motorway, and yet I couldn’t desire from her a message different from this one.

I realize that in rushing towards Y what I desire most is not to find Y at the end of my race: I want Y to be racing towards me, this is the answer I need; what I mean is, I want her to know I’m racing towards her but at the same time I want to know she’s racing towards me. The sole thought that comforts me is also the thought that torments me most: the thought that if Y at this moment is speeding towards A, then each time she sees the headlights of a car speeding towards B she will ask herself whether it’s me racing towards her, and she will desire it to be me, and she will never be sure. Now two cars going in opposite directions have found themselves for a moment side by side, a flash has illuminated the raindrops, the sound of the motors has become fused as in an abrupt gust of wind: perhaps it was the two of us, or rather it is certain that one car was I and the other car could be she, that is the one I want to be she, the sign in which I want to recognize her, though it is this very sign that makes her unrecognizable to me. Speeding along the motorway is the only method we have left, she and I, to express what we have to say to each other, but we cannot communicate it or receive the communication as long as we are speeding.

Of course I took my place behind the wheel in order to reach her as fast as possible; but the more I go forward the more I realize that the moment of arrival is not the real end of my race. Our meeting, with all the inessential details a meeting involves, the minute network of sensations and meanings and memories that would spread out before me – the room with the philodendron, the opaline lamp, the earrings – and the things I would say to her, some of which would surely be mistaken or mistakable, and the things she would say, to some extent surely jarring or in any case not what I expect, and all the succession of unpredictable consequences that each gesture and each word involved would raise around the things that we have to say to each other, or rather that we want to hear each other say, a storm of such noise that our communication already difficult over the telephone would become even more hazardous, stifled, buried as if under an avalanche of sand. This is why, rather than go on talking, I felt the need to transform the things to be said into a cone of light hurled at a hundred miles an hour, to transform myself into this cone of light moving over the motorway, because it is certain that such a signal can be received and understood by her without being lost in the ambiguous disorder of secondary vibrations, just as I, to receive and understand the things she has to say to me, would like them to be only (rather, I would like her to be only) this cone of light I see advancing on the motorway at a speed (I’m guessing, at a glance) of eighty or ninety. What counts is communicating the indispensable, skipping all the superfluous, reducing ourselves to essential communication, to a luminous signal that moves in a given direction, abolishing the complexity of our personalities and situations and facial expressions, leaving them in the shadowy container that the headlights carry behind them and conceal. The Y I love is really that moving band of luminous rays, and all the rest of her can remain implicit; and the me that she can love, the me that has the power of entering that circuit of exaltation which is her affective life, is the flashing of this pass which, through love of her and with a certain risk, I am now attempting.

And also with Z (I haven’t forgotten Z for a moment) I can establish the proper relationship only if he is for me simply the flash and glare that follow me, or the tail-lights I follow: because if I start taking into consideration his person, with its pathetic – shall we say – element but also with its undeniably unpleasant aspect, though it is – I must admit – also excusable, with all his boring story of unhappy love and his way of behaving which is always a bit questionable … well, there’s no telling where I would end. Instead, while things continue like this, all is well: Z trying to pass me or allowing himself to be passed by me (but I don’t know if it is he), Y hastening towards me (but I don’t know if it’s she) repentant and again in love, I hurrying to her, jealous and eager (but I’m unable to let her or anyone else know).

Naturally, if I were absolutely alone on this motorway, if I saw no other cars speeding in either direction, then everything would be much clearer, I would be certain that Z hasn’t moved to supplant me, nor has Y moved to make peace with me, facts I might register as positive or negative in my accounting, but which would in any case leave no room for doubt. And yet if I had the power of exchanging my present state of uncertainty for such a negative certainty, I would refuse the bargain without hesitation. The ideal condition for excluding every doubt would prevail if in this part of the world there existed only three automobiles: mine, Y’s and Z’s; then no other car could proceed in my direction except Z’s, and the only car heading in the opposite direction would surely be Y’s. Instead, among the hundreds of cars that the night and the rain reduce to anonymous glimmers, only a motionless observer situated in a favourable position could distinguish one car from the other and perhaps recognize who is inside. This is the contradiction in which I find myself: if I want to receive a message I must give up being a message myself, but the message I want to receive from Y – namely, that Y has made herself into a message – has value only if I in turn am a message, and on the other hand the message I am has meaning only if Y doesn’t limit herself to receiving it like any ordinary receiver of messages but if she also is that message I am waiting to receive from her.

By now to arrive in B, go up to Y’s house, find that she has remained there with her headache brooding over the causes of our quarrel, would give me no satisfaction; if then Z were to arrive also a scene would be the result, histrionic and loathsome; and if instead I were to find out that Z has prudently stayed at home or that Y didn’t carry out her threat to telephone him, I would feel I had acted the fool. On the other hand, if I had remained in A, and Y had gone there to apologize to me, I would have found myself in an embarrassing position: I would have seen Y through different eyes, a weak woman, clinging to me, and something between us would have changed. I can no longer accept any situation other than this transformation of ourselves into the messages of ourselves. And what about Z? Even Z must not escape our fate, he too must be transformed into the message of himself; it would be terrible if I were to run to Y jealous of Z and if Y were running to me, repentant, avoiding Z, while actually Z hasn’t remotely thought of stirring from his house …

Halfway along the motorway there is a service station. I stop, I run to the bar, I get a handful of change, I dial the B area code, then Y’s number. No answer. I allow the rain of returned coins to pour down with joy: it’s clear Y couldn’t overcome her impatience, she got into her car, she has rushed towards A. Now I have gone back to the motorway, but on the other side: I too am rushing towards A. All the cars I pass could be Y, or else all the cars that pass me. On the opposite lane all the cars advancing in the other direction could be Z, in his self-delusion. Or else Y too has stopped at a service station, has telephoned my house in A; not finding me in she has realized I am going to B, she has turned around. Now we are speeding in opposite directions, moving away from each other, and the car I pass or that passes me is Z, who also tried telephoning Y at the halfway point.

Everything is more uncertain than ever but I feel I’ve now reached a state of inner serenity: as long as we can check our telephone numbers and there is no answer then we will continue, all three of us, speeding back and forth along these white lines, with no points of departure or of arrival to threaten with their sensations and meanings the single-mindedness of our race, freed finally from the awkward thickness of our persons and voices and moods, reduced to luminous signals, the only appropriate way of being for those who wish to be identified with what they say, without the distorting buzz our presence or the presence of others transmits to our messages.

To be sure, the price paid is high but we must accept it: to be indistinguishable from all the other signals that pass along this road, each with his meaning that remains hidden and undecipherable because outside of here there is no one capable of receiving us now and understanding us.





The Count of Monte Cristo





1




From my cell, I can say little about the construction of this Château d’If where I have been imprisoned for so many years. The tiny barred window is at the end of a shaft that pierces the thickness of the wall: it frames no view; from the greater or lesser luminosity of the sky I can recognize approximately the hours and the seasons; but I do not know if, beneath that window, there is the open sea or the ramparts or one of the inner courtyards of the fortress. The shaft narrows in the form of a chute; to look out I would have to advance, crawling, to the very end; I have tried, it is impossible, even for a man reduced, as I am, to a mere shadow. The opening perhaps is further than it seems: estimation of the distance is confused by the funnel-like perspective and by the contrast of the light.

The walls are so thick they could contain other cells, stairways, casemates and powder magazines; or else the fortress could be all wall, a full and compact solid, with one live man buried in the middle. The images you summon up when you are imprisoned follow one another without any reciprocal exclusion: the cell, the aperture, the corridors along which the jailer comes twice a day with the soup and the bread could be simply tiny pores in a rock of spongy consistency.

You hear the sea pounding, especially on stormy nights; at times it seems almost that the waves are breaking here against the very wall to which I put my ear; at times they seem to be digging below, under the rocks of the foundations, and my cell seems to be at the top of the tallest tower, and the rumble rises through the prison, a prisoner too, as in the horn of a conch shell.

I prick up my ears: the sounds describe variable, jagged spaces and forms around me. From the jailers’ shuffling I try to establish the network of the corridors, the turns, the openings, the straight lines broken by the dragging of the meal-container to the threshold of each cell and by the creak of the locks: I succeed only in fixing a succession of points in time, without any correspondence in space. At night the sounds become more distinct, but more uncertain in marking places and distances: somewhere a rat is gnawing, an ill man groans, a boat’s siren announces its entry into the Marseilles roads, and Abbé Faria’s spade continues digging its way among these stones.

I don’t know how many times Abbé Faria has attempted to escape: each time he has worked for months prising up the stone slabs, crumbling the seams of mortar, perforating the rock with rudimentary awls; but at the moment when the pick’s last blow should open his way to the rocky shore, he realizes he has come out in a cell that is even deeper in the fortress than the one from which he set out. It requires only a little error of calculation, a slight deviation in the incline of a tunnel and he is penetrating into the prison’s viscera with no hope of finding his way again. After every failure, he goes back to correcting the plans and formulas with which he has frescoed the walls of his cell; he goes back to improving his arsenal of improvised tools; and then he resumes his scraping.





2




I too have thought and still think about a method of escape; in fact, I have made so many surmises about the topography of the fortress, about the shortest and surest way to reach the outer bastion and dive into the sea, that I can no longer distinguish between my conjectures and the data based on experience. Working with hypotheses, I can at times construct for myself such a minute and convincing picture of the fortress that in my mind I can move through it completely at my ease; whereas the elements I derive from what I see and what I hear are confused, full of gaps, more and more contradictory.

In the early days of my imprisonment, when my desperate acts of rebellion hadn’t yet brought me to rot in this solitary cell, the routine tasks of prison life had caused me to climb up and down stairs and bastions, cross the entrance halls and posterns of the Château d’If; but from all the images retained by my memory, which now I keep arranging and rearranging in my conjectures, there is not one that fits neatly with another, none that helps explain to me the shape of the fortress or the point where I now am. Too many thoughts tormented me then – about how I, Edmond Dantès, poor but honest sailor, could have run afoul of the law’s severity and suddenly lost my freedom – too many thoughts to allow my attention to concern itself with the plan of my surroundings.

The bay of Marseilles and its islands have been familiar to me since boyhood; and every embarkation of my not long life as a sailor, the departures and the arrivals, had this background; but the seaman’s eye, every time it encounters the black fort of If, shifts away in an instinctive fear. So when they brought me here chained in a boat filled with gendarmes, and this cliff and the walls then loomed on the horizon, I understood my fate and bowed my head. I didn’t see – or I don’t remember – the pier where the boat docked, the steps they made me climb, the door that closed behind my back.

Now that, with the passage of years, I have stopped brooding over the chain of infamy and ill-luck that caused my imprisonment, I have come to understand one thing: the only way to escape the prisoner’s state is to know how the prison is built.

If I feel no desire to imitate Faria, it is because the very knowledge that someone is seeking an avenue of escape is enough to convince me that such an avenue exists or, at least, that one can set himself the problem of seeking it. So the sound of Faria’s digging has become a necessary complement to the concentration of my thoughts. I feel not only that Faria is a man attempting his own escape but also that he is a part of my plan; and not because I am hoping for an avenue to safety opened by him – he has been wrong so many times by now I have lost all faith in his intuition – but because the only information I have concerning this place where I am has come to me from the series of his mistakes.





3




The walls and the vaults have been pierced in every direction by the Abbé’s pick, but his itineraries continue to wind around themselves like a ball of yarn, and he constantly goes through my cell as he follows, each time, a different course. He has long since lost his sense of orientation: Faria no longer recognizes the cardinal points, indeed he cannot recognize even the zenith and the nadir. At times I hear scratching at the ceiling; a rain of plaster falls on me; a breach opens; Faria’s head appears, upside down. Upside down for me, not for him; he crawls out of his tunnel, he walks head down, while nothing about his person is ruffled, not his white hair, nor his beard green with mould, nor the tatters of sackcloth that cover his emaciated loins. He walks across the ceiling and the walls like a fly, he sinks his pick into a certain spot, a hole opens; he disappears.

Sometimes he has hardly disappeared through one wall when he pops out again from the wall opposite: he hasn’t yet drawn his heel through the hole here when his beard is already appearing over there. He emerges again, more weary, skeletal, aged, as if years had passed since the last time I saw him.

At other times, however, he has hardly slipped into his tunnel when I hear him make the sound of a long aspiration like somebody preparing to sneeze loudly: in the labyrinth of the fortress there is much cold and damp; but the sneeze never comes. I wait: I wait for a week, for a month, for a year; Faria doesn’t come back; I persuade myself he is dead. All of a sudden the wall opposite trembles as if shaken by an earthquake; from the shower of stones Faria looks out, completing his sneeze.

We exchange fewer and fewer words; or we continue conversations I cannot remember ever having begun. I realize Faria has trouble distinguishing one cell from another among the many he crosses in his mistaken journeys. Each cell contains a pallet, a pitcher, a wooden slops bucket, a man standing and looking at the sky through a narrow slit. When Faria appears from underground, the prisoner turns around: he always has the same face, the same voice, the same thoughts. His name is the same: Edmond Dantès. The fortress has no favoured points: it repeats in space and time always the same combination of figures.





4




In all my hypotheses of escape, I try to imagine Faria as the protagonist. Not that I tend to identify myself with him: Faria necessarily plays his role so that I can mentally envisage my escape in an objective light, as I could not do if I were living it: I mean, dreaming it in the first person. By now I no longer know if the man I hear digging like a mole is the real Faria opening breaches in the walls of the real fortress of Château d’If or whether it is the hypothesis of a Faria dealing with a hypothetical fortress. It amounts to the same thing in any case: it is the fortress that wins. It is as if, in the contests between Faria and the fortress, I pressed my impartiality so far as to side with the fortress against him … no, now I am exaggerating: the contest does not take place only in my mind, but between two real contenders, independently of me; my efforts are directed towards seeing it with detachment, in a performance without anguish.

If I can come to observe fortress and Abbé from a perfectly equidistant point of view, I will be able to discern not only the particular errors Faria makes time after time, but also the error in method which continually defeats him and which I, thanks to my correct setting of the problem, will be able to avoid.

Faria proceeds in this way: he becomes aware of a difficulty, he studies a solution, he tries out the solution, encounters a new difficulty, plans a new solution, and so on and on. For him, once all possible errors and unforeseen elements are eliminated, his escape can only be successful: it all lies in planning and carrying out the perfect escape.

I set out from the opposite premise: there exists a perfect fortress, from which one cannot escape; escape is possible only if in the planning or building of the fortress some error or oversight was made. While Faria continues taking the fortress apart, sounding out its weak points, I continue putting it back together, conjecturing more and more insuperable barriers.

The images of the fortress that Faria and I create are becoming more and more different: Faria, beginning with a simple figure, is complicating it extremely to include in it each of the single unforeseen elements he encounters in his path; I, setting out from the jumble of these data, see in each isolated obstacle the clue to a system of obstacles, I develop each segment into a regular figure, I fit these figures together as the sides of a solid, polyhedron or hyperpolyhedron, I inscribe these polyhedrons in spheres or hyperspheres, and so the more I enclose the form of the fortress the more I simplify it, defining it in a numerical relation or in an algebraic formula.

But to conceive a fortress in this way I need the Abbé Faria constantly combating landslides of rubble, steel bolts, sewers, sentry boxes, leaps into nothingness, recesses in the sustaining walls, because the only way to reinforce the imagined fortress is to put the real one continously to the test.





5




Therefore: each cell seems separated from the outside only by the thickness of a wall, but Faria as he excavates discovers that in between there is always another cell, and between this cell and the outside, still another. The image I derive is this: a fortress that grows around us, and the longer we remain shut up in it the more it removes us from the outside. The Abbé digs, digs, but the walls increase in thickness, the battlements and the buttresses are multiplied. Perhaps if he can succeed in advancing faster than the fortress expands, Faria at a certain point will find himself outside unawares. It would be necessary to invert the relative speeds so that the fortress, contracting, would expel the Abbé like a cannonball.

But if the fortress grows with the speed of time, to escape one would have to move even faster, retrace time. The moment in which I would find myself outside would be the same moment I entered here: I look out on the bay at last, and what do I see? A boat full of gendarmes is landing at If; in the midst is Edmond Dantès, in chains.

There, I have gone back to imagining myself as the protagonist of the escape, and I have immediately risked not only my future but my past, my memories. Everything that is unclear in the relationship between an innocent prisoner and his prison continues to cast shadows on images and decisions. If the prison is surrounded by my outside, that outside would bring me back inside each time I succeeded in reaching it: the outside is nothing but the past, it is useless to try to escape.

I must conceive of the prison either as a place that is only inside itself without an outside – that is, giving up the idea of leaving it – or I must conceive of it not as my prison but as a place with no relation to me inside or outside; that is, I must study an itinerary from inside to outside that precludes the import that ‘inside’ and ‘outside’ have acquired in my emotions; valid, that is, even if instead of ‘outside’ I say ‘inside’ and vice versa.





6




If outside there is the past, perhaps the future is concentrated at the innermost point of the island of If, in other words the avenue of escape is an avenue towards the inside. In the graffiti with which Abbé Faria covers his walls, two maps with ragged outlines alternate, constellated with arrows and marks: one is meant to be the plan of If, the other of an island of the Tuscan archipelago where a treasure is hidden: Monte Cristo.

It is, in fact, to seek this treasure that Abbé Faria wants to escape. To succeed in his intention he has to draw a line that in the map of the island of If carries him from inside to outside and in the map of the island of Monte Cristo carries him from outside to that point which is further inland than all the other points, the treasure cave. Between an island he cannot leave and an island he cannot enter there must be a relation: therefore in Faria’s hieroglyphics the two maps can be superimposed and are almost identical.

It is hard for me to understand whether Faria is now digging in order to dive into the open sea or to penetrate the cave full of gold. In either case, if one looks closely, he is tending towards the same point of arrival: the place of the multiplicity of possible things. At times I visualize this multiplicity as concentrated in a gleaming underground cavern, at times I see it as an irradiating explosion. The treasure of Monte Cristo and the escape from If are two phases of the same process, perhaps successive perhaps periodical as in a pulsation.

The search for the centre of If-Monte Cristo does not lead to results that are more sure than those of the march towards its unreachable circumference: in whatever point I find myself the hypersphere stretches out around me in every direction; the centre is all around where I am; going deeper means descending into myself. You dig and dig and you do nothing but retrace the same path.





7




Once he has come into possession of the treasure, Faria intends to liberate the Emperor from Elba, give him the means to put himself again at the head of his army … The plan of escape-search on the island of If-Monte Cristo is therefore not complete if it does not include also the search-escape of Napoleon from the island where he is confined. Faria digs; he penetrates once again into the cell of Edmond Dantès; he sees the prisoner from behind, looking as usual at the sky through the slit-window; at the sound of the pick the prisoner turns: it is Napoleon Bonaparte. Faria and Dantès-Napoleon together excavate a tunnel in the fortress. The map of If-Monte Cristo-Elba is drawn in such a way that by turning it a certain number of degrees the map of Saint Helena is obtained: the escape is reversed into an exile beyond return.

The confused reasons for which both Faria and Edmond Dantès were imprisoned have, in different ways, something to do with the Bonapartist cause. That hypothetical geometric figure called If-Monte Cristo coincides in certain of its points with another figure called Elba-Saint Helena. There are points of the past and of the future in which Napoleonic history intervenes in our poor prisoners’ history, and other points where Faria and I can or could influence a possible return of the Empire.

These intersections make any calculation of predictions even more complicated; there are points where the line that one of us is following bifurcates, ramifies, fans out; each branch can encounter branches that set out from other lines. Along one jagged line Faria goes by, digging; and only a few seconds keep him from bumping into the baggage wagons and cannon of the Imperial Army reconquering France.

We proceed in the dark; only the way our paths twist upon themselves warns us that something has changed in the paths of the others. We may say that Waterloo is the point where the path of Wellington’s army might intersect the path of Napoleon; if the two lines meet, the segments beyond that point are cut off; in the map where Faria digs his tunnel, the projection of the Waterloo angle forces him to turn back.





8




The intersections of the various hypothetical lines define a series of planes arranged like the pages of a manuscript on a novelist’s desk. Let us call Alexandre Dumas the writer who must deliver to his publisher as soon as possible a novel in twelve volumes entitled The Count of Monte Cristo. His work proceeds in this fashion: two assistants (Auguste Maquet and P. A. Fiorentino) develop one by one the various alternatives that depart from each single point, and they furnish Dumas with the outline of all the possible variants of an enormous supernovel; Dumas selects, rejects, cuts, pastes, interposes; if a given solution is preferred for well-founded reasons but omits an episode he would find it useful to include, he tries to put together the stub-ends of disparate provenance, he joins them with makeshift links, racks his brain to establish an apparent continuity among divergent segments of future. The final result will be the novel The Count of Monte Cristo to be handed to the printer.

The diagrams Faria and I draw on the walls of the prison resemble those Dumas pens on his papers to establish the order of the chosen variants. One bundle of sheets of paper can already be passed for printing: it contains the Marseilles of my youth; moving over the closely written lines I can fight my way on to the docks of the harbour, climb up the Rue de la Canebière in the morning sun, reach the Catalan village perched on the hill, see Mercedes again … Another bundle of papers is awaiting the final touches: Dumas is still revising the chapters of the imprisonment in the Château d’If; Faria and I are struggling inside there, ink-stained, in a tangle of revisions … At the edges of the desk there are piles of paper, the suggestions for the story’s continuation which the two assistants are methodically compiling. In one of them, Dante’s escapes from prison, finds Faria’s treasure, transforms himself into the Count of Monte Cristo with his ashen, impassive face, devotes his implacable will and his boundless wealth to revenge; and the Machiavellian Villefort, the greedy Dang-lars, the grim Caderousse pay the price of their foul deeds; just as, for so many years among these walls, I had foreseen in my angry daydreams, in my longings for revenge.

Beside this, other sketches for the future are arranged on the desk. Faria opens a breach in the wall, bursts into the study of Alexandre Dumas, casts an impartial dispassionate look on the expanse of pasts and presents and futures – as I could not do, I who would try to recognize myself with tenderness in the young Dantés just promoted to his captaincy, with pity in the imprisoned Dantés, with delirious grandeur in the Count of Monte Cristo who makes his regal entrance into the proudest salons of Paris; I who in their place would find with dismay so many strangers – Faria takes a page here, a page there, like a monkey he moves his long hairy arms, hunts for the escape chapter, the page without which all the possible continuations of the novel outside the fortress become impossible. The concentric fortress, If-Monte Cristo-Dumas’s desk, contains us prisoners, the treasure, and the supernovel Monte Cristo with its variants and combinations of variants in the nature of billions of billions but still in a finite number. Faria has set his heart on one page among the many, and he does not despair of finding it; I am interested in seeing the accumulation of rejected sheets increase, the solutions which need not be taken into account, which already form a series of piles, a wall …

Arranging one after the other all the continuations which allow the story to be extended, probable or improbable as they may be, you obtain the zigzag line of the Monte Cristo of Dumas; whereas connecting the circumstances that prevent the story from continuing you outline the spiral of a novel in negative, a Monte Cristo preceded by the minus sign. A spiral can wind upon itself towards the inside or towards the outside: if it twists towards the inside of itself, the story closes without any possible development; if it turns in widening curves it could, at every turn, include a segment of the Monte Cristo with the plus sign, finally coinciding with the novel Dumas will give to the printer, or perhaps even surpassing it in its wealth of lucky chances. The decisive difference between the two books – sufficient to cause one to be defined as true and the other as false, even if they are identical – lies entirely in the method. To plan a book – or an escape – the first thing to know is what to exclude.





9




And so we go on dealing with the fortress, Faria sounding out the weak points of the wall and coming up against new obstacles, I reflecting on his unsuccessful attempts in order to conjecture new outlines of walls to add to the plan of my fortress-conjecture.

If I succeed in mentally constructing a fortress from which it is impossible to escape, this conceived fortress either will be the same as the real one – and in this case it is certain we shall never escape from here, but at least we will achieve the serenity of one who knows he is here because he could be nowhere else – or it will be a fortress from which escape is even more impossible than from here – and this, then, is a sign that here an opportunity of escape exists: we have only to identify the point where the imagined fortress does not coincide with the real one and then find it.





From World Memory and Other Cosmicomic Stories



The Mushroom Moon




According to Sir George Darwin, a solar tide caused the Moon to detach itself from the Earth. The attraction of the Sun acted on the lightest covering of rock (granite) as if that were a fluid, lifting up part of it and tearing it away from our planet. The waters that then covered the Earth entirely were largely swallowed up by the huge chasm that the Moon’s departure had opened up (that is, the Pacific Ocean), leaving the remaining granite uncovered: this then fragmented and hardened into the continents. Without the Moon, the evolution of life on Earth would have been very different, if indeed it had happened at all.

Yes, yes, now you mention it, it all comes back to me! – exclaimed old Qfwfq – Of course. It began to sprout up like a mushroom, the Moon, from underwater: I happened to be passing by in a boat just at that spot, when I suddenly felt something pushing me from below. ‘Damn! A sandbank!’ I shouted, but I’d already been hoisted in the air on top of a sort of white lump, my boat high and dry as well, my fishing line dangling above the water and my hook in the air.

It’s easy to talk about it now, but I’d like to have seen you in my position then, trying to predict all those phenomena. Of course in those days too there were some people who warned us of the dangers the future had in store; and now we can see they had understood a lot of things, not about the Moon – no, that was a surprise for all of us – but about the lands that would surface. Inspector Oo, from the High and Low Tides Observatory, gave many lectures on this topic but nobody ever paid him any attention. Just as well, because later he made a huge error in his calculations and paid for it in person.

At that time the surface of the globe was entirely covered by water, with no land visible. Everything in the world was flat and devoid of contours, the sea was a shallow fresh-water pond, and as for us, we went about in our canoes, fishing for sole.

From his calculations at the Observatory, Inspector Oo had become convinced that huge changes were about to happen on Earth. His theory was that the globe would soon divide into two zones: one made up of continents and one of oceans. On the continental areas mountains and watercourses would form, and lush vegetation would grow. For those of us who ended up on the continent there would be infinite possibilites for becoming rich; whereas in the meantime the oceans would become uninhabitable for everyone except their own special fauna, and our fragile boats would be blown away by enormous storms.

But who could take these apocalyptic prophecies seriously? Our whole life took place on the tiny layer of water, and we could not imagine a different existence. Everyone sailed on their own little boat, I engrossed in the patient labour of the fisherman, the pirate Bm Bn setting traps for the duck-shepherds behind the clumps of reeds, that slip of a girl Flw paddling along in her kayak. Could any of us have imagined that that stretch of water as smooth as a millpond would produce a wave – not a wave of water, but a hard wave of granite – which would whisk us away with it?

But one thing at a time. The first to end up high and dry was myself, suddenly perched there with my boat beached. I heard my friends’ cries rising up from the sea: they were shouting to each other, pointing at me, mocking me, and their words reached me as if from another world: ‘Look at Qfwfq up there, ha ha!’

The hump I was hoisted on would not stay still: it careered across the sea, rolling like a marble; no, I didn’t explain that well, it was a subterranean wave which, wherever it rolled, lifted up the carpet of rock and then dropped it again back in its own place. The great thing was that I was transported by this solid tide, and instead of falling back into the water as soon as it moved on, I stayed hovering up there, advancing with it as it moved forward, and all around I could see more and more fish getting stuck on dry land, struggling and gasping for air on the hard, whitish surface that was slowly emerging.

What did I think? Well, I certainly didn’t think about Inspector Oo’s theories (I had hardly heard him mentioned), but only about the new fishing possibilities that had unexpectedly opened up for me: all I had to do was stretch out my hand and I could fill my boat with sole. In the other boats, the cries of amazement and mockery turned into curses and threats. The fishermen called me a thief, a pirate: our rule was that each of us had to fish in the area that had been allocated; straying into someone else’s territory was considered a crime. But now, who could stop this self-propelled reef? It was not my fault if my boat filled up while theirs stayed empty.

So the scene looked like this: there was the ball of granite speeding across the stretch of water and continually expanding, surrounded by a cloud of quivering sole; me catching fish in midair; behind me, in hot pursuit, were the boats of my friends, jealously trying to attack my fortress; after them, the ever-increasing distance that none of the new hordes of pursuers managed to make up; and after that was the twilight descending on them, and the darkness of the night gradually swallowing them up, whereas there where I was the Sun never ceased to beat down in an everlasting midday.

It was not only the fishes that got beached on the wave of rock; everything that floated round us ended up being shipwrecked on it: flotillas of canoes laden with archers, ordinary barges full of provisions, royal barges conveying kings and princesses and their courtiers. As we advanced, we saw towns built on wooden piles standing out on the horizon, high above the waters; and immediately they were overthrown in a crashing of broken wood and straw and squawking of hens. These were already revealing indications of the nature of the phenomenon: the fragile layer of things covering the world could be negated, replaced by a mobile desert at whose passage every living presence was overwhelmed and eliminated. This alone should have been enough to warn all of us, especially the Inspector. But, I repeat, I was not making any hypotheses about the future: I had quite enough to do to keep my balance, and try to maintain a more general, more widespread equilibrium, which I could see was being shaken to its foundations.

Each time the wave of rock shattered an obstacle into pieces, I got covered by a shower of knick-knacks, tools, diadems. An unscrupulous person in my place (as would clearly be seen later) would have immediately made off with the stuff. Me? No, you know me, I didn’t. On the contrary, I was actually seized by the opposite urge: I started to chuck back to the poor fishermen the sole that I had caught so easily. I’m not saying this to make it sound as if I’m especially good; the only way I could find to counter what was happening was to try to repair the damage, to give the victims a hand. I shouted from the top of the advancing mountain: ‘Every man for himself! Run! Get out of the way!’ I tried to support the wavering piles that my hands managed to reach, so that once the wave had passed they would remain upright. And to the castaways floundering about down below I distributed everything that the collisions and crashes dropped within my hands’ reach. What I hoped was this: that a new equilibrium would emerge from the fact that it was I who was up there on top. I would have liked the wave of rock to sweep away both the evil of its squalid emergence and the good of the actions to which I devoted so much effort, both of which were aspects of the same natural phenomenon, more powerful than my will and that of anyone else.

Instead, none of this transpired: the people didn’t understand my cries and did not get out of the way, the piles crumpled the minute I touched them, the stuff I chucked out set off riots in the water and increased the confusion.

My only successful good deed was to save a gaggle of ducks from falling prey to the pirate Bm Bn. Their shepherd was advancing unaware between the reeds in his tranquil canoe, and failed to see the lance that was poised to transfix him. I arrived on the wave of stone, just in time to block the bandit’s arm. I went ‘Shoo! Shoo!’ to the ducks, which flew to safety. But the minute I was on top of Bm Bn, he clung on to me: from then on there were two of us on top of the wave of rock, and the balance between good and evil that I still hoped to preserve was definitively compromised.

For Bm Bn, finding himself there was simply an opportunity for new acts of piracy, poaching and destruction. The wave of granite continued wiping out the world, ruthless and impassive; but over it now reigned a mind that turned this destruction to his own profit. I was now no longer the victim of a blind, telluric upheaval, but of that pirate; what could I do to halt those two unstoppable forces? Between the rock and the pirate I felt myself decidedly on the side of the rock; I felt it was in some mysterious way my ally, but I did not know how to combine my weak strength with it in order to prevent Bm Bn from wreaking violence and destruction.

Nor did things change when Flw too ended up on the rock-wave. I was obliged to witness her kidnapping without being able to move a finger to stop it, because Bm Bn had tied me up like a salami. The girl Flw was paddling along in her kayak between the water lilies and daffodils; Bm Bn whirled a long lasso in the air and captured her; but she was a young girl, kind and submissive, and she soon resigned herself to being that brute’s prisoner.

I couldn’t accept it, however, and I said so: ‘I’m not here to be your sidekick, Bm Bn. Untie me and I’ll go.’

Bm Bn barely turned his head. ‘Are you still there?’ he said. ‘Whether you’re there or not, you matter less to me than a flea. Go on, throw yourself in the sea, go and drown yourself,’ and he untied me.

‘I’m going, but this is not the last you’ll hear of me,’ I said, and beneath my breath I added for Flw to hear: ‘Wait for me: I’ll come back and release you.’

I got ready to dive in. Just at that moment I spotted someone on the horizon striding over the sea on stilts. As our wave approached, far from getting out of the way he actually came towards us. His stilts went up in pieces, and he crashed down on to the lump of granite.

‘My calculations were exact,’ he said. ‘Allow me to introduce myself: Inspector Oo, from the High and Low Tides Observatory.’

‘You’ve arrived just at the right moment, Inspector, to give me advice on what to do,’ I replied. ‘The situation up here has reached the point where I was just about to leave.’

‘You would be making a huge mistake,’ the Inspector objected, ‘and I’ll tell you why.’

He began to expound his theory, which was now confirmed by the evidence: the expected emergence of the continents was in fact beginning with this swelling landmass on which we found ourselves; an era of new, unlimited possibilities was opening up before us. I listened open-mouthed: the outlook had changed; instead of riding a nucleus of destruction and devastation, I was on the cusp of a new possibility for a life on Earth that would be infinitely more plentiful than before.

‘And that is why,’ the Inspector triumphantly concluded, ‘I wanted to join you.’

‘That will depend on whether I want you to stay!’ sneered Bm Bn.

‘I’m sure we’ll become friends,’ Oo declared. ‘We’re heading towards huge cataclysms and my researches and forecasts will allow us to take them in hand; in fact to turn them to our advantage.’

‘Not only our advantage, I hope!’ I exclaimed. ‘If what you say is true, Inspector, if this great stroke of good luck has really happened to us, how can we exclude our fellow-beings from it? We must tell everyone we meet! Get them to come up here with us!’

‘Shut up there, you idiot!’ – and Bm Bn grabbed me by the stomach – ‘unless you want me to chuck you back headlong into the slime you came from! I’m here and so is whoever I want with me! End of story. Isn’t that right, Inspector?’

I turned to Oo, confident I’d find in him an ally against the pirate’s arrogance: ‘Inspector, I’m sure you didn’t devote yourself to your studies out of selfishness! You won’t allow Bm Bn to profit from this for personal gain …’

The Inspector shrugged. ‘Well, as a matter of fact, I don’t really want to interfere in your internal squabbles: I don’t know the background; I only deal with the technical side. If, as I seem to understand, the person in charge here is this man’ – and he nodded in the direction of Bm Bn – ‘then it’s to his attention that I would like to submit the results of my calculations …’

The disillusionment I felt on hearing these words, which seemed like the most unexpected betrayal, was caused not so much by the Inspector himself as by his predictions for the future. He continued describing life as it would develop on the emerging lands: cities that would rise on stone foundations, roads travelled by camels, horses, carts, cats, caravans; and gold and silver mines, and forests of sandalwood and molucca wood, and elephants, and pyramids, and towers, and clocks, and lightning-conductors, and tramways, cranes, lifts, skyscrapers, bunting and flags on national holidays; luminous signs in all sorts of colours on the theatre and cinema façades, reflecting on pearl necklaces on grand gala evenings. We were all listening to him, Flw with an enchanted smile, Bm Bn with his nostrils dilated by his greed for possessions; but by now these fabulous prophecies no longer stirred any hope in me, because they only meant the perpetuation of my enemy’s rule, and that was enough to cloak every marvel with a shiny, false, vulgar patina.

I said as much to Flw, in a moment when the other two were busy with their plans. ‘Better to stay with our poor aquatic life as sole-fishers,’ I told her, ‘than all these splendours whose price is being subject to Bm Bn!’ and I suggested we escape together, abandoning the bandit and the Inspector on their continent: ‘Let’s see how they manage on their own …’

Did I persuade her? Flw was, as I said, a docile creature, as fragile as a butterfly’s wing. The Inspector’s projections fascinated her, but Bm Bn’s brutality repulsed her. It was not difficult for me to stir up her resentment against the pirate; she agreed to follow me.

The granite excrescence seemed more than ever to be thrust out of the Earth’s innards, straining with all its forces towards the Sun. In fact, the part that was most exposed to solar attraction was expanding continually, so that the area below it ended up being reduced to a kind of bottleneck or stalk, hidden in a cone of shadow. We would have to use that as our escape route, sheltered as it was from the midday light. ‘This is it!’ I said to Flw, and, taking her by the hand, we slithered down the stalk. ‘It’s now or never!’

I had said these words as a rousing exhortation, without suspecting how literally they corresponded to reality. We had barely swum out of reach of what now appeared to us, seeing it from the outside, as a monstrous extension of our planet, when the Earth and the waters began to shudder and shake. The granite mass attracted by the Sun was uprooting itself from the basalt base to which it had until then been anchored. And a huge boulder of enormous dimensions – the upper part eroded and porous, but underneath still soaking as with the mucus of the Earth’s innards, raddled with mineral fluids and lava, and barnacled with colonies of worms – hovered in the air, light as a leaf. The waters of the globe cascaded into the huge crack left agape, thus letting islands and peninsulas and plateaux emerge in the distance.

Clinging on to these emerging plateaux, I managed to save Flw and myself, but I still could not take my eyes off that bit of world that had flown away and had started to rotate in the sky as it moved off. I was still in time to hear Bm Bn’s curses coming down from it, as he took it out on the Inspector – ‘You and your bloody predictions, you fool …’ – while already in the rotating movement the rough edges and outcrops were gradually being smoothed down into a sphere with a uniform, lime-white surface. And by now the Sun was moving further away, while the sphere – what from then on would be called the Moon – was overtaken by night, but it retained a reflection of pale brightness shining on it as on a desert.

‘They got what they deserved, those two!’ I exclaimed, and since Flw did not seem to fully understand that the situation had been reversed, I explained: ‘That was not the continent that the Inspector predicted, but – if my senses do not deceive me – this one that is forming underneath our feet.’

Mountains and rivers and valleys and seasons and trade winds were giving shape to the emergent regions. Already the first iguanodons, harbingers of the future, were coming out of the sequoia forests to reconnoitre. Flw seemed to find everything natural: she plucked a pineapple from the branch, broke its skin against a tree-trunk, bit the juicy flesh, and burst out laughing.

That’s the way things have gone, as you know, right up to today. Flw, no doubt about it, is happy. She goes out into the night that is resplendent with neon signs, wraps herself softly in her chinchilla fur, smiles at the photographers’ flashes. But I wonder if this really is my world.

From time to time I look up at the Moon and think of all the desert, the cold and the void up there which weigh down on the other side of the scales and sustain this poor pomp of ours. If I jumped down just in time on this side, that was just chance. I know that I am in debt to the Moon for everything I have on Earth, indebted to what is not here for everything that is.





The Daughters of the Moon




Deprived as it is of a covering of air to act as a protective shield, the Moon found itself exposed right from the start to a continual bombardment of meteorites and to the corrosive action of the Sun’s rays. According to Tom Gold of Cornell University, the rocks on the Moon’s surface were reduced to powder through constant attrition from meteorite particles. According to Gerard Kuiper of the University of Chicago, the escape of gases from the Moon’s magma gave the planet a light, porous consistency, like that of a pumice stone.

The Moon is old – Qfwfq agreed – pitted with holes, worn out. Rolling around naked through the skies, it gets worn down and loses its flesh like a bone that’s been gnawed. This is not the first time that such a thing has happened; I remember Moons that were even older and more battered than this one; I’ve seen loads of these Moons, seen them being born and running across the sky and dying out, one punctured by hail from shooting stars, another exploding from all its craters, and yet another oozing drops of topaz-coloured sweat that evaporated immediately, then being covered by greenish clouds before being reduced to a dried-up, spongy shell.

What happens on the Earth when a Moon dies is not easy to describe; I’ll try to do it by referring to the last instance I can remember. Following a lengthy period of evolution, one could say that the Earth had by then reached the point where we are now; in other words, it had entered that phase when cars wear out more quickly than the soles of your shoes; beings that were more or less human manufactured and bought and sold things; the cities covered the continents with luminous colour. These cities grew more or less in the same places as now, however different the shape of the continents might have been. There was even a New York which in some way resembled the New York that is familiar to all of you, but much newer, or rather more awash with new products, new toothbrushes, a New York with its own Manhattan that stretched out dense with skyscrapers gleaming like the nylon bristles of a brand new toothbrush.

In this world where every object was instantly thrown away and substituted with another new and perfect replacement, at the slightest sign of breakage or ageing, at the first dent or stain, there was just one false note, one shadow: the Moon. It wandered through the sky, naked, corroded and grey, more and more alien to the world down here, a hangover from a way of being that was now incongruous.

Ancient expressions like ‘full moon’, ‘half moon’, ‘last-quarter moon’, continued to be used but were just figures of speech: how could you call ‘full’ that shape that was all cracks and holes and that always seemed on the point of crashing down on our heads in a shower of rubble? Not to mention when it was a waning moon! It was reduced to a kind of cheese crust that had been nibbled away, and always disappeared before we expected it to. At the new moon, we wondered each time whether it would ever appear again (did we hope it would just disappear like that?) and when it did reappear again, looking more and more like a comb losing its teeth, we averted our eyes with a shudder.

It was a depressing sight. We went around in the crowds, our arms laden with parcels, going in and out of the big department stores that were open day and night – with our eyes we scanned the neon signs which climbed higher and higher up the skyscrapers, notifying us constantly of the new products that had been launched on the market – and there suddenly we would see it advancing, pale in the midst of those dazzling lights, slow and sick, and we could not get it out of our heads that every new thing, each product we had just bought, could become worn out, fade away, deteriorate, and we would lose our enthusiasm for running around buying things and working like mad, something not without consequences for the success of industry and commerce.

That was how we began to consider the problem of what to do with it, this counterproductive satellite: it did not serve any purpose; it was a wreck, no good to anyone any more. As it lost weight, it started to incline its orbit towards the Earth: it was dangerous, apart from anything else. And the nearer it got, the more it slowed down its course: we could no longer calculate its quarters; even the calendar, the rhythm of the months had become a mere convention; the Moon went forward in fits and starts as though it were about to collapse.

On these nights of low moon, people of a more unstable temperament began to do weird things. There was always a sleepwalker teetering along the edges of a skyscraper with his arms outstretched towards the Moon, or a werewolf starting to howl in the middle of Times Square, or a pyromaniac setting fire to the dock warehouses. By now these were common occurrences which no longer attracted the usual crowd of rubbernecks. But when I saw a girl sitting, completely naked, on a bench in Central Park, I had to stop.

Even before I saw her, I had had the feeling that something mysterious was about to happen. As I crossed Central Park at the wheel of my open-top car, I felt myself bathed in a flickering light, like that of a fluorescent tube emitting a series of livid, blinking flashes before it comes on fully. The view all around me was like that of a garden that had sunk into a lunar crater. Beside a pond reflecting a slice of Moon sat the naked girl. I braked. For a second I thought I recognized her. I ran out of the car towards her, then stopped as if stunned. I did not know who she was; I just felt that I had to do something for her urgently.

Everything was scattered on the grass all round the bench: her clothes, one stocking and shoe here and the others there, her earrings, necklace and bracelets, handbag and shopping bag, with the contents emptied out in a wide arc, and countless packets and goods, almost as if on her way back from a lavish shopping spree in the city’s shops, that creature had felt herself called and had instantly dropped everything to the ground, had realized that she had to free herself of every object or sign that held her bound to the Earth, and was now waiting there to be assumed into the lunar sphere.

‘What’s happening?’ I stammered. ‘Can I help you?’

‘Help?’ she asked, with her eyes still staring upwards. ‘Nobody can help. Nobody can do anything,’ and it was clear that she was not talking about herself but about the Moon.

We had the Moon above us, a convex shape almost crushing us, like a ruined roof, studded with holes like a cheese-grater. Just at that moment the animals in the zoo began to growl.

‘Is this the end?’ I asked mechanically, with no idea what I meant.

She replied, ‘It’s the beginning,’ or something like that (she spoke almost without opening her lips).

‘What do you mean? It’s the beginning of the end, or something else is beginning?’

She got up, walked across the grass. She had long copper-coloured hair that came down over her shoulders. She was so vulnerable that I felt the need to protect her in some way, to shield her, and I moved my hands towards her as though to be ready to stop her from falling or to fend off anything that might harm her. But my hands did not dare even graze her, and always stopped a few centimetres from her skin. And as I followed her like this past the flower gardens, I realized that her movements were similar to mine, that she too was trying to protect something fragile, something that might fall and shatter into pieces, and that needed consequently to be led towards places where it could settle gently, something that she could not touch but could only guide with her gestures: the Moon.

The Moon seemed lost: having abandoned the course of its orbit, it no longer knew where to go; it let itself be transported like a dried leaf. Sometimes it appeared to be plummeting towards the Earth, at others corkscrewing in a spiral movement, at others still it just seemed to be drifting. It was losing height, that was certain: for a second it seemed as if it would crash into the Plaza Hotel; instead it slid into a corridor between two skyscrapers, and disappeared from view towards the Hudson. It reappeared shortly afterwards, on the opposite side, popping out from behind a cloud, bathing Harlem and the East River in a chalky light, and as though caught by a gust of wind it rolled towards the Bronx.

‘There it is!’ I shouted. ‘There, it’s stopped!’

‘It can’t stop!’ exclaimed the girl, and she ran naked and barefoot over the grass.

‘Where are you going? You can’t wander around like that! Stop! Hey, I’m talking to you! What’s your name?’

She shouted out a name like Daiana or Deanna, something that could also have been an invocation. And she disappeared. In order to follow her, I jumped back into my car and began to search the avenues of Central Park.

The beams of my headlights lit up hedges, little hills, obelisks, but the girl, Diana, was nowhere to be seen. By now I had gone too far: I must have gone past her; I turned round to go back the way I came. A voice behind me said: ‘No, it’s there, keep going!’

Sitting behind me on the folded-back hood of my car was the naked girl, pointing towards the Moon.

I wanted to tell her to get down, that I could not travel across the city with her so prominently on view in that state, but I did not dare distract her, all intent as she was on not losing sight of the luminous glow that disappeared and reappeared at the end of the Avenue. And in any case – and this was even stranger – no passer-by seemed to notice this female apparition sitting up on my open-top car.

We crossed one of the bridges that link Manhattan to the mainland. Now we were going along a multi-lane highway, with other cars alongside us, and I kept my eyes fixed on the road ahead, fearing the laughter and crude comments that the sight of the two of us was no doubt prompting in the cars on either side. But when a saloon car overtook us, I nearly went off the road in surprise: crouched on its roof was a naked girl with her hair spread out in the wind. For a second I thought my passenger was leaping from one fast-moving car to another, but all I had to do was turn my eyes round ever so slightly to see that Diana’s knees were still there at the same height as my nose. And it was not just her body that glowed before my eyes: I saw girls everywhere, stretched out in the strangest of poses, clinging to the radiators, doors, mudguards of the speeding cars – their golden or dark hair was the only thing that contrasted with the pale or dark gleam of their naked skin. One of these mysterious female passengers was positioned on every car, all stretching forwards, urging the drivers to follow the Moon.

They had been summoned by the endangered Moon: I was certain of that. How many of them were there? More cars carrying lunar girls gathered at every crossroads and junction, converging from all quarters of the city on the place above which the Moon seemed to have stopped. Reaching the outskirts we found ourselves opposite an automobile scrapyard.

The road petered out in a hilly area with little valleys, ridges, hills and peaks; it was not the contours of the land that created the bumpiness, but rather the layers of things that had been thrown away: everything that the consumerist city expelled once it had quickly used it up so it could immediately enjoy the pleasure of handling new things, ended up in that unprepossessing neighbourhood.

Over the course of many years, piles of battered fridges, yellowing issues of Life magazine, fused light-bulbs had accumulated around an enormous junkyard for cars. It was over this jagged, rusty territory that the Moon now loomed, and the swathes of beat-up metal swelled up as if lifted by a high tide. They resembled each other: the decrepit Moon and that crust of the Earth that had been soldered into an amalgam of wreckage; the mountains of scrap metal formed a chain that closed in on itself like an amphitheatre, whose shape was precisely that of a volcanic crater or a lunar sea. The Moon hung over this space and it was as if the planet and its satellite were acting as mirror images of each other.

Our car engines had all stopped: there is nothing that intimidates cars so much as their own cemeteries. Diana got down and all the other Dianas followed suit. But their energy now seemed to fade: they moved with uncertain steps, as though on finding themselves amidst those ruins of sharp scrap-iron they were suddenly seized by an awareness of being naked; many of them folded their arms to cover their breasts, as if shivering with cold. Meanwhile they scattered, climbing over the mountains of useless scrap: they went over the top, and down into the amphitheatre, and found themselves forming as it were a huge circle there in the middle. Then they all raised their arms up together.

The Moon gave a start as though that gesture of theirs had affected it, and it seemed for an instant to recover its energy and to climb again. The circle of girls stood with their arms raised, and their faces and breasts turned towards the Moon. Was that what the Moon had asked of them? Did it need them to support itself in the sky? I did not have time to ask myself this question. At that very moment the crane entered the scene.

The crane had been designed and built by the authorities, who had decided to cleanse the sky of such an inelegant encumbrance. It was a bulldozer from which a kind of crab’s claw rose up; it came forward on its caterpillar-treads, squat and stocky, just like a crab; and when it arrived at the place that had been prepared for the operation, it seemed to become even more squat, in order to cling to the Earth with every part of itself. The winch spun quickly; the bulldozer raised its arm into the sky; nobody had ever thought that a crane with such a long arm could be built. Its bucket opened, showing all its teeth; now, more than a crab’s claw, it resembled a shark’s mouth. The Moon was just there; it wavered as though it wanted to escape, but the crane seemed to be magnetized: we saw the Moon being hoovered up, as it were, and landing in its jaws. Its mandibles closed round it with a dry sound: crack! For a second it seemed that the Moon had turned into crumbs like a squashed meringue, but instead it stayed inside the jaws of the bucket, half inside and half out. It had turned into an oblong shape, a kind of thick cigar held between the bucket’s teeth. Down came a shower the colour of ashes.

The crane now tried to yank the Moon out of its orbit and drag it downwards. The winch had started to wind backwards: by this stage it needed to make a huge effort. Diana and her friends had stayed motionless with their arms raised, as though hoping to beat the enemy’s aggression with the strength of their circle. It was only when the ash from the disintegrating Moon rained down on their faces and breasts that we saw them disperse. Diana let out a sharp cry of lament.

At that point the imprisoned Moon lost what little light it had left: it became a black, shapeless rock. It would have crashed down on to the Earth had it not been held fast by the bucket’s teeth. Down below, the contractor’s men had prepared a metal net, fixing it to the ground with long nails, all around the area where the crane was slowly lowering its load.

Once it was on the ground, the Moon was a pockmarked, sandy boulder, so dull and opaque that it was incredible that previously it had illuminated the sky with its shining reflection. The crane opened the jaws of its bucket, went back on its caterpillar treads, and almost flipped over as it was suddenly lightened of its load. The contractor’s men were ready with the net: they wrapped it round the Moon, trapping it between the net and the ground. The Moon tried to struggle in its straitjacket: a tremor like that of an earthquake caused avalanches of empty cans to slide down from the mountain of refuse. Then all was peaceful again. The now moonless sky was being drenched by bursts of light from the big lamps. But the darkness was already fading.

Dawn found the car cemetery contained an extra wreck: the Moon that had been shipwrecked there in the middle was almost indistinguishable from the other discarded objects; it was the same colour, had the same condemned look, the same appearance as something you couldn’t imagine ever being new. All around, a low murmuring resounded throughout the crater of terrestrial rubbish: the light of dawn revealed a swarm of living things slowly waking up. Bearded creatures were advancing amidst disembowelled lorry carcasses, the shattered wheels, the crumpled metal.

In the midst of the things that had been thrown away lived a community of people who had also been thrown away, or marginalized, or had thrown themselves away of their own volition, or who had got tired of running all over the city to sell and buy new things that were destined to go out of date immediately: people who had decided that only things that had been thrown away were the real riches of the world. Encircling the Moon, throughout the whole amphitheatre, these lanky figures were standing upright or were seated, their faces framed by beards or unkempt hair. It was a tatterdemalion, bizarrely dressed crowd and in their midst was the naked Diana and all the girls from the night before. They came forward, and began to release the steel wires of the net from the nails that had been driven into the ground.

Immediately, like an air balloon released from its moorings, the Moon rose, hovering above the girls’ heads, above the grandstand full of tramps, and stayed suspended, held back by the steel net whose wires Diana and her friends were operating, sometimes pulling them, sometimes letting go, and when they all started to run, still holding the ends of the wires, the Moon followed.

As soon as the Moon moved, a kind of wave began to rise from the valleys of wreckage: the old car carcasses crushed like accordions started to march, creakily arranging themselves in a procession, and a stream of battered cans rolled along, making a noise like thunder, though you couldn’t tell whether they were dragging or being dragged along by everything else. Following this Moon that had been saved from the scrap-heap, all the things and all the people that had been resigned to being chucked into a corner, started on the road again, and swarmed towards the richest neighbourhoods of the city.

That morning the city was celebrating Consumer Thanksgiving Day. This feast came round every year, one day in November, and had been set up to allow the shops’ customers to display their gratitude towards the god Production who tirelessly satisfied their every desire. The biggest department store in town organized a parade each year: an enormous balloon, in the shape of a garishly coloured doll, was paraded through the main street, held by ribbons which sequin-clad girls pulled as they marched behind a musical band. So that morning the procession was coming down Fifth Avenue: the majorette twirled her baton in the air, the big drums banged, and the giant made of balloons representing ‘The Satisfied Customer’ flew amidst the skyscrapers, obediently following a leash held by girls in kepis, tassles and fringed epaulettes, riding on spangly motorbikes.

At the same time another parade was crossing Manhattan. The flaky, mouldy Moon was also processing, sailing between the skyscrapers, pulled by the naked girls, and behind it came a line of beat-up cars and skeletons of lorries, in the midst of a silent crowd gradually increasing in size. Thousands of people flocked to join the throng that had been following the Moon from the early hours of the morning, people of all colours, whole families with children of every age, especially now that the procession was filing past the most crowded black and Puerto Rican areas around Harlem.

The lunar procession zigzagged around Uptown, started down Broadway, and came quickly and silently down that street to converge with the other procession which was dragging its balloon giant along Fifth Avenue.

At Madison Square one procession met the other; or rather, it became just one single procession. ‘The Satisfied Customer’, perhaps because of a collision with the Moon’s jagged surface, turned into a rubber rag. On the motorbikes now were the Dianas pulling the Moon with multicoloured ribbons; or more likely, since their number had at least doubled, the female motorcyclists had thrown away their uniforms and kepis. A similar transformation had overtaken the motorbikes and the cars in the parade: you could no longer tell which were old and which were new – the twisted wheels, the rusty mudguards were mixed up with bodywork as shiny as a mirror, with paintwork gleaming like enamel.

And behind the parade, shop windows became covered with cobwebs and mould, lifts in skyscrapers started to creak and groan, posters with advertisements on them turned yellow, egg-holders in fridges filled with chicks as if they were incubators, televisions broadcast whirlwinds of atmospheric storms. The city had consumed itself at a stroke: it was a disposable city following the Moon on its last voyage.

To the sound of the band drumming on empty petrol cans, the procession arrived at the Brooklyn Bridge. Diana lifted up her majorette’s baton: her friends twirled their ribbons in the air. The Moon made a last dash, went over the curved grillwork of the bridge, tipped towards the sea, crashed into the water like a brick, and sank downwards, sending up thousands of little bubbles to the surface.

Meanwhile instead of letting the ribbons go, the girls had stayed attached to them, and the Moon had lifted them up, sending them flying over the parapet of the bridge: in the air they described arcs like divers and disappeared amidst the waves.

We stood and stared, some of us on the Brooklyn Bridge, others on the jetties on the shore, gazing in astonishment, caught between the urge to dive in after them and our confidence that we would see them reappear.

We did not have long to wait. The sea began to vibrate with waves that spread out in a circle. At the centre of this circle there appeared an island, which grew like a mountain, like a hemisphere, like a globe resting on the water, or rather raised just above it; no, like a new Moon rising in the sky. I say a Moon even though it did not resemble a Moon any more than the one we had seen plunge into the depths a few moments before. However, this new Moon had a very different way of being different: it emerged from the sea dripping a trail of green, glistening seaweed; spouts of water gushed in fountains from fields that lent it the sheen of an emerald; a steamy vegetation covered it, but not with plants. This covering seemed to be made of peacock feathers, full of eyes and shimmering colours.

This was the landscape that we just managed to glimpse before the sphere it covered swiftly receded into the sky, and the more minute details were lost in a general impression of freshness and lushness. It was dusk: the contrasts of the colours were fading into a vibrant chiaroscuro; the lunar fields and woods were little more than contours, barely visible, on the taut surface of the shining globe. But we were just in time to see some hammocks hanging from branches, rocked by the wind, and nestling in them I saw the girls who had led us to that place. I recognized Diana, at peace at last, fanning herself with a feather punkah, and perhaps sending me a signal of recognition.

‘There they are! There she is!’ I shouted; we all shouted, and the happiness at having found them again was already fraught with the pain of having lost them now for ever, because the Moon rising in the dark sky sent out only the reflections of the Sun on its lakes and fields.

We were seized by a frenzy: we began to gallop across the continent, through the savannahs and forests that had covered over the Earth again and buried cities and roads, obliterating all trace of everything that had been. And we trumpeted, lifting up to the sky our trunks and our long, thin tusks, shaking the long hair of our croups with the violent anguish that lays hold of all us young mammoths, when we realize that now is when life begins, and yet it is clear that what we desire shall never be ours.





The Meteorites




According to the most recent theories, the Earth was originally a tiny, cold body which later increased in size through the incorporation of meteorites and meteor dust.

At first we were under the illusion that we could keep it clean – old Qfwfq said – since it was really small and you could sweep it and dust it every day. Of course a lot of stuff did come down: in fact you would have thought that the Earth had no other purpose in its orbiting but to gather up all the dust and rubbish hovering in space. Now it’s different, there’s the atmosphere; you look at the sky and say: ‘Oh, how clear it is, how pure!’ But you should have seen what landed on us when the planet bumped into one of those meteor storms in the course of its orbit and could not get out. It was a powder white as mothballs, which deposited itself in tiny granules, and sometimes in bigger, crystalline splinters, as though a glass lampshade had crashed down from the sky, and in the middle of it you could also find biggish pebbles, scattered bits from other planetary systems, pear cores, taps, Ionic capitals, back numbers of the Herald Tribune and Paese sera: everyone knows that universes come and go, but it’s always the same stuff that goes round. The Earth, being small and also swift (because it travelled much faster than it does now), managed to avoid a lot of it: we would see an object approaching from the depths of space, fluttering like a bird – then later we’d find out it was a sock – or sailing towards us pitching slightly, like the time we saw a grand piano; then it would come to within half a metre of us, and then nothing happened, it would go on its way without even grazing us: it was lost, perhaps for ever, in the empty darkness we left behind. But most of the time the meteoric shower would empty over us, stirring up a thick dustcloud and making a racket like empty cans; that was the moment when a convulsive agitation would seize hold of my first wife, Xha.

Xha wanted to keep everything clean and in order; and she managed it. Of course she had to keep very busy, but the planet was still of a size to allow us to carry out a daily check, and the fact that we were the only two inhabitants – though it had the disadvantage that there was nobody to give us a hand – was also an advantage because two calm and orderly people like us do not create chaos: when they take something they put it back in its right place. Once we had repaired the damage done by the meteoric rubble, and dusted everything properly, and washed and hung out the laundry, which constantly got dirty, we had nothing more to do.

As for the rubbish, initially Xha would wrap it up in little packages that I would chuck into the void, flinging them as high as I could: the Earth had still very little power of attraction, and in any case I had strong arms and a certain skill in throwing, so we were able to rid ourselves of items of considerable bulk and weight, forcing them back into space whence they had come. With the granules of dustcloud such an operation was impossible: even if we filled up paper bags, you could not throw them far enough away for them not to come back; they nearly always came undone in the air and we would find ourselves covered again in dust from head to toe.

For as long as it was possible, Xha preferred to get rid of the dust by putting it inside certain cracks in the ground; then the cracks would fill up, or rather they expanded into overflowing craters. The fact was that the huge quantity of accumulated matter made the Earth swell from the inside and these cracks were actually caused by this increase in volume. So she decided to spread out the dust in uniform layers on the planet’s surface and let it set into a smooth and continuous crust, so as not to give the impression of a solution that had been only half thought through or abandoned.

The skill and tenacity that Xha had shown in trying to remove every granule that came to disturb the polished harmony of our world were now directed towards making the meteoric crumbs the very basis of this harmonious order, storing them up in regular layers, hiding them under a polishable surface. However, every day more powder would land on the Earth’s floor in a veil that was at times thin and at other times thickened by humps and mounds here and there; we would then instantly get to work to establish a new layered surface.

The bulk of our planet was increasing, but thanks to the care which my wife and I – under her direction – lavished on it, it retained a shape that was without irregularities, excrescences or waste, and no shadow or stain sullied its white-naphthalene sheen. The external layers hid even those objects which landed on us all mixed up with the dustcloud and which by now we could no longer send back to the currents of the cosmos because the Earth, as it grew, had set up around itself a gravitational field too strong for my arms to overcome. Where the detritus was densest in volume we buried it underneath tumuli of dust in the shape of beautifully squared-off pyramids, not too high, arranged in symmetrical rows, so that every intrusion of the shapeless and the arbitrary was cancelled from our sight.

When describing my first wife’s industry, I would not want to have given you the idea that there was an element of irritability, anxiety, or anything like alarm, in her scrupulosity. No, Xha was sure these meteorite showers were an accident, a temporary phenomenon, in a universe that was still in its settling-down phase. She had no doubts about the fact that our planet and the other heavenly bodies, and everything that was inside and outside of them, had to obey a precise, regular geometry of straight lines and curves and surfaces; according to her, anything that was not part of this pattern was an irrelevant leftover, and trying immediately to sweep it away or bury it was her way of minimizing its importance, even of denying its existence. Of course this is my interpretation of her ideas: Xha was a practical woman, who did not get bogged down in general statements but simply tried to do well what she saw as her duty, and did so willingly.

Every evening, before lying down, Xha and I would walk through this terrestrial landscape that was protected with such meticulous persistence. It was a smooth, glabrous expanse, interrupted only, at regular intervals, by the stark edges of those pyramid-shaped elevations. Above us in the sky revolved planets and stars at the appropriate speed and distance, reflecting rays of light that spread a uniform sparkle over our ground. My wife waved a stick-fan to stir the always rather dusty air around our faces; I carried an umbrella to protect us from any gusts of meteoric rain. A light sprinkling of starch lent a continual freshness to Xha’s well-folded clothes; a white ribbon held her hair firm.

These were the moments of tranquil contemplation we allowed ourselves; but they did not last long. In the morning we would get up early, and our few hours of sleep had already been enough for the Earth to be covered again with debris. ‘Hurry up, Qfwfq, there’s no time to waste!’ Xha would say as she thrust a broom into my hands, and I would set off on my usual round, while the dawn turned the narrow, bare horizon of the plain white. As I went along, I observed here and there piles of wreckage and knick-knacks; as the light increased, I would notice the opaque dusting that veiled the planet’s gleaming floor. With my broom I would sweep everything I could into a bin or a bag I carried with me, but first I would stop to study the fresh haul the night had brought us: a sculpted bull’s head, a cactus, a cartwheel, a gold nugget, a Cinerama projector. I would weigh them and run them through my hands, suck a finger pricked by the cactus, and have fun imagining that these totally incongruous objects were connected by a mysterious link which I was meant to discover. Such imaginings I could indulge in when alone: because with Xha the passion to remove, to obliterate, to throw away was so overpowering that we would never stop to look at what we were sweeping up. Instead now it was my curiosity that became the most powerful urge in my daily inspections, and I would set out every morning almost happily, whistling as I went.

Xha and I had in a way divided up our tasks, agreed which hemisphere each would keep in order. In my hemisphere sometimes I did not remove the stuff immediately, especially when it was rather heavy, but piled it up in a corner, to be collected later in a barrow. So at times there formed what looked like piles or stacks: carpets, sand-dunes, editions of the Koran, oil-wells, an absurd lumping together of knick-knacks that didn’t match. Of course Xha would not have approved of my system, but to tell the truth I felt a kind of pleasure seeing these composite shadows looming on the horizon. At times I would even leave the piled-up stuff from one day to the next (the Earth was starting to become so big that Xha was not able to get round it all in one day), and the surprise in the morning was discovering how many new things had been added to the rest.

One day I was contemplating a pile of broken boxes and rusty bins, over which stood a crane holding the distorted wreckage of a car, when on lowering my gaze I saw, on the threshold of a hut built with bits of metal and plywood, a girl busy peeling potatoes. She was dressed, it seemed to me, in rags: strips of cellophane, scraps of frayed scarves; in her hair she had bits of straw and wood-shavings. She was taking the potatoes from a sack and, peeling them with a penknife, she would unroll ribbons of potato-skin which piled up in a grey mass.

I felt the need to apologize: ‘I’m sorry, you’ve found us in a bit of a mess, I’ll clean it up at once, I’ll clear everything …’

The girl flung a peeled potato into a basin, and said: ‘Oh, for heaven’s sake …’

‘Perhaps if you could give me a hand …’ I said, or rather this was said by that part of me that was still thinking in the way it had always thought. (Just the night before, Xha and I had agreed: ‘Yes, if we could find someone to give us a hand, it would all be so different!’)

‘No, you,’ said the girl, yawning and stretching, ‘you help me to peel.’

‘We no longer know how to get rid of this stuff that lands on us,’ I explained. ‘Look at this,’ and I lifted up a barrel without a lid that I had just spotted. ‘Who knows what’s in it?’

The girl sniffed and said: ‘Anchovies. We’ll have fish and chips.’

She insisted I sit with her and cut the potatoes into thin strips. In the middle of that rubbish-tip she found a blackish can full of oil. She lit a fire on the ground, using wrapping material, and began to fry tiny fish and slices of potato in a rusty basin.

‘We can’t do this here, it’s dirty …’ I said, thinking of Xha’s kitchen utensils, shiny as glass.

‘Oh, for heaven’s sake, come on …’ she replied, serving the hot fry-up in parcels of paper.

Later I often asked myself whether I was wrong not to tell Xha that another person had landed on the Earth that day. But I would have had to own up to my laziness in letting so much stuff pile up. ‘I’ll do a good clean-up first,’ I thought, even though I realized that everything had become more difficult.

Every day I went to visit the girl, Wha, in the middle of that avalanche of new objects with which the whole hemisphere was now overflowing. I didn’t understand how she managed to live in the midst of that confusion, and let things pile up on top of each other: lianas on top of baobab trees, Romanesque cathedrals on top of crypts, hoists above coal deposits, and more stuff again settling on top of that, chimpanzees on the lianas, sightseeing tour coaches parked on the squares in front of the Romanesque cathedrals, firedamp fumes in the galleries of the mines. I got angry every time: that wretched girl, her way of thinking was the exact opposite of mine.

Nevertheless, at times I had to admit that I liked watching her move around in the midst of all that, with those careless gestures of hers, as though her every action happened by chance; and the surprising thing was seeing that, each time, everything she did turned out unexpectedly well. Wha chucked the first things she came across into the same saucepan for boiling, for instance, beans and pork rind: who would have thought it? This produced a wonderful minestrone; she would pile up pieces from Egyptian monuments one on top of the other as though they were dishes to wash – a woman’s head, two ibis wings, the body of a lion – and out came a wonderful Sphinx. In short, I was amazed to find myself thinking that – once I’d got used to it – I would end up being perfectly at ease with her.

What I could never forgive her for was her absent-mindedness, the chaos, the way she never knew where she had left things. She forgot the Mexican volcano Paricutin in the middle of a ploughed field, and the Roman theatre at Luni amidst the terraces of a vineyard. The fact that she subsequently would find them just at the right time was not enough to assuage my irritation, because that was simply another accidental circumstance to add to the others, as if there were not enough already.

Of course my life was not here, it was the other life, the one I lived at Xha’s side, keeping the surface of the other hemisphere level and clean. On this matter I was of the same mind as Xha: no doubt about it, I worked so that the Earth could be kept in its state of perfection; I could spend hours with Wha only because I was sure I could go back to Xha’s world, where everything worked the way it should, where you understood everything that had to be understood. I should say that with Xha I reached an internal calm underneath constant external activity, whereas with Wha I could maintain an external calm, do precisely what I wanted to do at that moment, but I paid for that peace with a constant anxiety, because I was sure that that state of things could not last.

I was wrong. On the contrary, the most disparate meteoric fragments continued to connect with each other, in however approximate a manner, and to compose themselves into a mosaic, even though it was one with gaps. Comacchio eels, a river source on Monviso, a series of ducal palaces, many hectares of rice-fields, agricultural workers’ trade-union traditions, some Celtic and Lombard suffixes, a certain growth index in industrial productivity, were materials that were scattered and unconnected but which fused into a tightly knit network of reciprocal relationships at the very moment when suddenly a river fell to Earth, and it was the Po.

Thus every new object that landed on our planet ended up by finding its own place as though it had always been there, as well as its relationship of interdependence with other objects, and the unreasonable presence of one thing found its reason for existing in the unreasonable presence of the others, to the point where the general disorder started to be able to be considered the natural order of things. It is in this context that one must also consider other facts which I shall barely touch on, since they belong to my private life: you’ll have gathered that I’m alluding to my divorce from Xha, and my second marriage, to Wha.

If one considers it carefully, life with Wha also had its own harmony. All around her things seemed to follow her very own style in the way they arranged themselves, joined other things and created a space for themselves; they followed her very lack of method, her indifference towards materials and uncertainty of gestures which culminated in the end, nevertheless, in an instantaneous and clear choice which could not be disputed. In the sky flew the Erechtheum, all damaged by cosmic shipwrecks, and losing its bits: it hovered for a second above the top of Mount Lycabettos, started to glide again, grazed the square by the Acropolis where the Parthenon was later to land, and came gently to rest a bit further on.

Sometimes it just needed a little intervention on our part to connect the detached pieces, to get the elements in the layers to match up, and in those cases Wha showed that she had a sure touch, even though it seemed she only wanted to fiddle about. As she tinkered, she would crumple the layers of sedimentary rocks into synclines and anticlines, she would change the orientation on the faces of crystals and obtain walls of feldspar, quartz, mica or slate, and between one layer and another she would hide marine fossils at different heights in order of date.

Thus the Earth began gradually to take on the contours you know today. The shower of meteoric fragments still continues to the present, adds new details to the picture, frames it with a window, a curtain, a network of telephone wires, fills the empty spaces with bits that fit together as best they can – traffic-lights, obelisks, bars, tobacconists, apses, floods, a dentist’s surgery, a cover from the Sunday edition of the Corriere with a hunter biting a lion – and always some excess is added in the execution of superfluous details, for instance in the pigmentation of butterflies’ wings, and some incongruous elements, like a war in Kashmir, and I always have the impression that there’s something still missing which is just about to arrive, perhaps just two Saturnian verses by Naevius to fill the gap between two fragments of an epic, or the principles that govern the assembly of DNA into chromosomes, and then the picture will be complete, I will have in front of me a world that is precise and abundant, I will once more have Xha and Wha together.

Now they are long since gone: Xha overcome by the dustcloud shower, gone for ever along with her realm of precision; Wha perhaps still crouching for fun somewhere in a hiding place in the packed storehouse of objects we’d found, and herself now unfindable. And I’m still waiting for them to come back – to reappear maybe in a thought crossing my mind – waiting to catch a glimpse of them with my eyes open or closed, but the two of them together, at the same time; all I would need is to have them both together for just one second to understand.





The Stone Sky




The speed with which seismic waves spread inside the terrestrial globe varies according to the depths and discontinuities between the materials that make up the Earth’s crust, mantle and core.

You live out there, on the crust, outside – the voice of old Qfwfq could be heard from the bottom of the crater – or almost outside, because above it you’ve got that other covering of air, but still outside for those who look at you from the concentric spheres that the Earth contains, as I do as I watch you while I move in the interstices between one sphere and another. Nor are you interested in knowing that the Earth, inside, is not compact: it is discontinuous, made up of overlapping skins of different densities, right down to the core of nickel and iron, which in turn is also a system of cores one inside the other, and each one rotates independently of the others depending on the greater or lesser fluidity of the element.

You insist on being called terrestrial, but who gave you the right to do so? Your real name should be extraterrestrials, people on the outside: terrestrials are those who live inside, as Rdix and I did, until the day you tricked her and took her away from me into that desolate outside of yours.

As for me, I’ve always lived inside here, along with Rdix initially, and then on my own, in one of these inner earths. A stone sky rotated above our heads, one more limpid than yours, but criss-crossed, like yours, by clouds at those points where gatherings of chrome or magnesium collected. Winged shadows rise up in flight: the internal skies have their own birds, accretions of light rock describing spirals, scudding upwards until they disappear from sight. There are sudden changes of weather: when bursts of leaden rain shower down, or when we have a hail of zinc crystals, there is nowhere else to escape except to slip inside the porous holes of the spongy rock. At times the darkness is split by a fiery zigzag: not a lightning-bolt, but incandescent metal slithering down a vein in the earth.

We believed that the sphere that supported us was the Earth, and the sky was the sphere that surrounded that first sphere: in fact, exactly the same as you do, but in our world such distinctions were always provisional, arbitrary, since the consistency of the elements changed continuously, and at a certain point we would notice that our sky was hard and compact, a boulder crushing us, whereas our earth was a sticky glue, churned up by whirlpools, pullulating with bursting bubbles. I tried to take advantage of the flows of heavier metals to get closer to the real centre of the Earth, to the core that acts as core to all other cores, and I took Rdix’s hand, to guide her in that descent. But every seepage that headed towards the core undermined other material and forced it to rise up towards the surface: at times as we plunged down we would be caught up in the wave that spurted towards the upper layers, curling around itself as it did so. So we would go back up the Earth’s radius in the opposite direction; amidst the mineral layers passages opened up that sucked us in while beneath us the rock turned solid again. In the end we found ourselves supported by another layer of ground and standing beneath another stone sky, without knowing whether we were higher or lower than the point we had started out from.

As soon as Rdix saw the metal of a new sky above us becoming fluid, she would be seized by the urge to fly. She dived upwards, swam across the dome of one sky, then of another, then of a third sky, and would grab on to the stalactites hanging from the highest vaults. I stayed behind her, partly to encourage her game, partly to remind her to take the journey back in the opposite direction. Of course, Rdix was also convinced, like me, that the point to which we had to head was the centre of the Earth. Only once we’d reached the centre would we be able to say that the whole planet was ours. We were the progenitors of life on Earth and for this reason we had to start to make it liveable from its core outwards, gradually extending our condition to the rest of the globe. We were headed towards earthly life, that is to say life of the Earth and on the Earth; not towards what pops up from its surface and which you call life on Earth but which is just a mould spreading its spores over the apple’s wrinkled skin.

Yours has proved to be the wrong way, a life condemned to remain for ever partial, superficial, insignificant. Rdix also knew this full well: and yet her capacity for being enchanted by things led her to love every state of suspension above all else, and as soon as she was allowed to soar upwards in leaps, in flights, in scaling the funnels of the underworld, you would see her seeking out the most unusual locations, the most extraordinary vantage points.

Border areas, passages between one earthly layer and another, gave her a mild vertigo. We knew that the Earth is made up of superimposed roofs, like the skins of an enormous onion, and that every roof leads you to a roof higher up, and all of them together prefigure the final roof, the point where the Earth ceases to be Earth, where all the inside is left on this side, and beyond there is only the outside. For you this border of the Earth is identified with the Earth itself; you think the sphere is the surface that wraps it, and not its total volume; you have always lived in that flat, flat dimension and you don’t even imagine that one can live elsewhere and in a different way. For us at that time, this border was something we knew existed, but we didn’t think we could see it without leaving the Earth, a prospect which seemed to us not so much frightful as absurd. That was where everything was flung out in eruptions and bituminous spurts and smoke-holes, everything that the Earth expelled from its innards: gases, liquid mixtures, volatile elements, base matter, all types of waste. It was the world in negative, something that we could not picture even in our minds, the abstract idea of it was enough to give us a shiver of disgust, no, of anxiety; or rather a stunned sensation, a kind of – as I said – vertigo (yes, that’s it, our reactions were more complex than you might think, especially Rdix’s), into which there crept an element of fascination, a kind of attraction to the void, to anything double-faced or absolute.

Following Rdix in these wandering whims of hers, I found myself in the mouth of an extinct volcano. Above us, beyond a kind of hourglass bottleneck, there opened up the cavity of a crater, lumpy and grey, a landscape not too different in form and substance from what we were used to in our subterranean depths; but what stopped us dead in our tracks was the fact that the Earth ended just there, it did not start to bear down on itself again in a different guise, and from that point onwards the void began, or at any rate a substance that was incomparably thinner than any we had gone through up to that point, a substance that was transparent and vibrating: blue air.

As far as vibrations are concerned, we were ready to accept those that spread slowly across granite and basalt, the snaps, clangs, deep booms moving torpidly through the masses of molten metals or the crystalline walls. Now, though, the vibrations of the air came towards us like a crackle of tiny, sharp acoustic sparks, succeeding each other from all points of space at a speed that was unbearable for us: it was a kind of tickle that led to a restless craving. We were seized – or at least I was: from here onwards I am forced to distinguish my mental responses from Rdix’s – by the desire to retreat into the black depths of silence over which the echo of earthquakes passes softly and is lost in the distance. But Rdix, attracted as she always was by what was rare and startling, felt an impatient desire to take hold of this unique thing, whether it was good or bad.

That was when the trap was sprung: beyond the mouth of the crater the air vibrated in a continuous manner, or rather in a continuous manner that contained several discontinuous ways of vibrating. It was a sound that filled out, then faded, then increased in volume again, and in these modulations it followed an invisible pattern that stretched out in time like a succession of full and empty intervals. Other vibrations were superimposed on these, which were sharp and well separated from one another, but they blended into a drone that sounded now sweet, now bitter. As they countered or accompanied the course of the deeper sound, they created a kind of sonorous circle or field or domain.

My immediate instinct was to escape from that circle, and return to the padded denseness: and I slid inside the crater. But in the same instant Rdix had run up the precipice towards where the sound came from and, before I could hold her back, had gone beyond the mouth of the crater. Either that or it was an arm, something that I could imagine was an arm, a sinuous arm, that grabbed her, and dragged her out; I managed to hear a cry, her cry, one that mingled with the previous sound, in harmony with it, in a single chant which she and the unknown singer intoned and picked out on the chords of some instrument, as they descended the external slopes of the volcano.

I don’t know if this image corresponds to what I saw or imagined: I was by then plunging down into my darkness, and the internal skies were closing over me one by one: flint vaults, aluminium roofs, atmospheres of sticky sulphur; and the variegated subterranean silence echoed around me with its muffled rumbles, and its sotto-voce thunder. The relief at finding myself far from the nauseating border with the air and from the torture of the soundwaves seized hold of me along with the desperation at having lost Rdix. So there I was, on my own: I had not been able to save her from the torture of being yanked from the Earth, and exposed to the continuous percussion of strings stretched tight in the air with which the world of the void pursues its illusions of existing. My dream of making the Earth alive by reaching its ultimate core with Rdix had failed. Rdix was a prisoner, exiled in the exposed wastelands of the outside.

There followed a period of waiting. My eyes contemplated the landscapes densely compressed against each other that filled the globe’s volume: spindly caverns, mountain-chains that were crowded together in splinters and strips, oceans wrung out like sponges: the more I recognized our crammed, concentrated, compact world, the more I suffered because Rdix was not there to inhabit it.

To free Rdix became my sole thought: to force the doors of the outside, invade the external with the internal, reconnect Rdix to terrestrial matter, build over her a new vault, a new mineral sky, save her from the hell of that vibrating air, that sound, that song. I espied lava gathering in the volcanic caverns, the way it pressed up the vertical conduits of the Earth’s crust: that was the way.

The day of the eruption came, a tower of lapilli rose black in the air above decapitated Vesuvius, the lava surged through the vines along the bay, burst the doors of Herculaneum, crushed the mule-driver and his beast against the city wall, while the dog imprisoned in his collar uprooted his chain and sought refuge in the barn. I was in the middle of it: I advanced with the lava, the fiery avalanche split into tongues, rivulets, snaking eddies, and in the forefront pushing furthest ahead I was there, running to find Rdix. I knew – something warned me – that Rdix was still a prisoner of the unknown singer: wherever I heard the music of that instrument and the sound of that voice, that was where she would be.

I was swept along by the lava flow amidst secluded gardens and marble temples. I heard a song and an arpeggio; two voices singing alternately: I recognized Rdix’s voice – but oh! how changed – as she followed that of the stranger. There was an inscription on the architrave, in Greek characters: Orpheos. I broke through the front door, overflowing the threshold. I saw her, just for an instant, beside the harp. The place was enclosed and hollow, deliberately made – you would have said – for music to gather there, as in a shell. A heavy curtain – made of leather, it seemed to me, or rather stuffed like a quilt – hid a window, thus isolating their music from the surrounding world. The minute I went in, Rdix yanked the curtain aside, revealing the open window: outside it stretched the bay dazzling with reflected light, and the city and its streets. The midday light invaded the room, the light and also the sounds: a strumming of guitars rose up on all sides and the uneven rumble of hundreds of loudspeakers, and these blended with a sharp sputtering of engines and a blaring of horns. This carapace of noise extended from there outwards over the surface of the globe, or rather over the strip that delimits your extraterrestrial existence, with aerials hoisted on roofs transforming the invisible and inaudible waves that pervade space, transistors stuck to your ears filling them at every second with the acoustic glue without which you don’t know whether you are alive or dead, jukeboxes that store and spew out sounds, and the endless siren of the ambulance collecting hour by hour those injured in your endless carnage. Against this wall of sound the lava came to a halt. Pierced by the shafts from the network of crackling vibrations, I made one more movement forwards towards the point where I had glimpsed Rdix for a second, but Rdix had disappeared, her kidnapper too: the music by which and on which they lived was swamped by the avalanche of noise; I was no longer able to distinguish either her or her song.

I withdrew, moving backwards through the lava flow, climbed back up the volcano’s slopes, went back to inhabit the silence, to bury myself.

Now, you who live outside, tell me, if by any chance you happen to catch Rdix’s song amidst the thick paste of sounds that surrounds you, the song that keeps her prisoner and which at the same time is itself a prisoner of the non-sound that encloses all music; if you manage to recognize Rdix’s voice, in which the distant echo of silence still resounds, tell me, let me have news of her, you extraterrestrials, you temporary winners, so that I can return to my plans to find Rdix again and descend with her to the centre of the terrestrial world, to make life terrestrial from the centre outwards, now that it is clear that your victory is actually a defeat.





As Long as the Sun Lasts




Depending on their size, brightness and colour, stars have a varying evolution that can be classified according to the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram. Their life can be very brief (just a few million years, for the large blue stars) or they can follow such a slow course (ten billion years, for the smaller yellow stars) that before it brings them to old age their life can last (in the case of the reddest and smallest ones) for billions of millennia. For all of them there comes a moment when, once all their hydrogen has been burned, there is nothing more left for them to do except expand and cool down (turning into Red Giants) and from that point they embark on a series of thermonuclear reactions that will bring them swiftly to extinction. The Sun, a yellow star of medium power which has already been shining for four or five billion years, has in front of it a time that is at least just as long again, before it reaches that point.

It was precisely for that reason, to have a bit of a quieter life, that my grandfather came and settled here – Qfwfq said – after the last supernova explosion had flung them once more into space: grandfather, grandmother, their children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren. The Sun was just at that stage condensing, a roundish, yellowish shape, along one arm of the galaxy, and it made a good impression on him, amidst all the other stars that were going around. ‘Let’s try a yellow one this time,’ he said to his wife. ‘If I’ve understood it right, the yellow ones are those that stay up longest without changing. And maybe in a short time from now a planetary system will form around it too.’

This idea of settling with all the family on one planet, maybe one of those with an atmosphere and beasties and plants, was one of Colonel Eggg’s old ideas for when he would retire, after all those comings and goings amidst incandescent matter. Not that he suffered from the heat, my grandfather, and as for upheavals in temperature, he had had to get used to such things for some time now, after so many years of service; still, once you’ve got to a certain age, everyone starts to like a temperate climate around them.

My grandmother, though, immediately butted in: ‘And why not on that other one? The bigger they are the more I trust them!’ and she pointed to a Blue Giant.

‘Are you mad, don’t you know what that is? Don’t you know about the blue ones? They burn so fast you don’t even notice, and barely a couple of thousand millennia go by and you’ve already got to start packing!’

But you know how Grandma Ggge is: she’s stayed young not just in her looks but also in her outlook, never happy with her lot, always craving change, no matter whether it’s for better or worse, attracted by everything that is different. And to think that the bulk of the upheaval, in those hasty and panicky removals from one heavenly body to another, always landed on her shoulders, especially when there were small children around. ‘It’s as if she didn’t remember from one move to the next,’ Grandpa Eggg would say, letting off steam with us grandchildren. ‘She never learns to calm down. I’m telling you, here, in the solar system, what can she complain about? I’ve been travelling all across galaxies for a long time now, so I’ve got a bit of experience, haven’t I? And does my wife ever acknowledge that?’

This is the Colonel’s obsession: he has had plenty to make him happy in his career, but he has never had this one satisfaction, the one he would like above all else: hearing his wife finally say, ‘Yes, Eggg, you were spot on about this, I wouldn’t have given tuppence for this Sun but you immediately managed to see that it was one of the most reliable and stable stars, one that wouldn’t start to play tricks two minutes later, and you were also able to put us in the right position to get a place on the Earth, when it later took shape … and this Earth, with all its limits and defects, still offers good residential areas, and the kids have space to play and schools that are not too far away …’ This is what the old Colonel would like his wife to tell him, indulging him just for once in his life. No chance. Instead, the minute she hears of some stellar system that works in a completely different way, for instance the varying luminosity of the ‘RR Lyrae’, her cravings begin: there life is probably more varied, you’re more in the swing, whereas here we’re stuck in this corner, in a dead end where nothing ever happens.

‘And what is it you want to happen?’ asked Eggg, appealing to all of us as witnesses. ‘As if we didn’t’ now know that it’s the same story everywhere: hydrogen is transformed into helium, then come the usual tricks with beryllium and lithium, the incandescent layers collapsing on top of each other, then swelling like balloons and getting paler and paler until they collapse again … If we could only, while we’re in the middle of it all, manage to enjoy the spectacle! But instead each time the great worry is not losing sight of the parcels and packages for the removal, and the kids crying, one daughter with inflamed eyes, a son-in-law whose denture is melting … The first to suffer from all this, everyone knows, is her, Ggge; she talks and talks, but when it comes to the actual event …’

Those early days were full of surprises for old Eggg too (he told us this so many times): the condensation of gas-clouds, the clash of atoms, matter clumping together and swelling and swelling until it ignites, and the sky swarming with white-hot bodies of every colour, each one seemingly different from all the others in diameter, temperature, density, in its way of contracting and dilating, and all those isotopes that nobody imagined existed, and those puffs and explosions, those magnetic fields … one unpredictable thing after the other. But now … all he needs is a glance and he’s worked it all out: what star it is, what its spectrum is, how much it weighs, what it burns, whether it acts as a magnet or spews out stuff, and how far away the stuff that is spewed out stops, and how many light-years away there might be another star.

For him the expanse of void is like a cluster of tracks in a railway junction: these and no others are the gauges, points, diversions; you can take this or that route but you can’t run in the middle or leap over the ballast. The same for the flow of time: every movement is slotted into a timetable which he knows by heart; he knows all the stops, delays, connections, deadlines, seasonal timetable variations. This had always been his dream for when he would retire from active service: to contemplate the ordered and regulated traffic that runs up and down the universe – like those pensioners who go to the station every day to see the trains arriving and departing – and to feel happy that he’s no longer the one to be bounced around, laden with luggage and kids, amidst the indifferent comings and goings of those contraptions, each one whirling around on its own …

An ideal spot, then, from every point of view. In the four billion years they’ve been here, they’ve already settled in more or less, got to know a few people: folk who come and go, of course, that’s the kind of place it is, but for Mrs Ggge, who loves variety so much, this ought to be a plus point. Now they have neighbours, on the same floor, Cavicchia they’re called, who are really nice people: neighbours who help you out, pleasant neighbours you can rely on.

‘I’d like to have seen you,’ Eggg says to his wife, ‘in the Clouds of Magellan: I bet you’d never have found such civilized people there!’ (The thing is that Ggge, in her craving for other homes, even brings up extra-galactic constellations.)

But when someone has reached a certain age, there’s no way you can change her ideas: if the Colonel hasn’t managed it after so many years of marriage, he certainly won’t manage it now. For instance, Ggge hears that their neighbours are leaving for Teramo. They’re from the Abruzzi, the Cavicchias, and every year they go back to visit their relations. ‘There,’ says Ggge, ‘everyone’s leaving and we’re always stuck here. I’ve got my mother whom I’ve not been to see for billions of years!’

‘When will you ever understand that it’s not the same thing?’ old Eggg protests.

My great-grandmother, you see, lives in the Andromeda Galaxy. Yes, at one stage she always travelled with her daughter and son-in-law, but right at the point when this clutch of galaxies started to form, they lost sight of each other: she went one way and they went the other. (Even today Ggge still blames the Colonel: ‘You should have paid more attention,’ she claims. And he replies: ‘Oh yes, I had nothing else to do at that particular time!’ This is all he says, so as not to point out that his mother-in-law, a wonderful woman, of course, but as a travelling companion, well, she was one of those people specially designed to complicate things, especially at moments of upheaval.)

The Andromeda Galaxy is straight up here, above our heads, but in between there are always a couple of billion light-years. For Ggge light-years seem like flea-jumps: she hasn’t realized that space is a glue you get stuck in, just like time.

The other day, perhaps to cheer her up, Eggg said to her: ‘Listen, Ggge, we won’t necessarily stay here for ever. How many millennia have we been here? Four million? Well, let’s say we must be halfway through our stay at the very least. Barely five million millennia will go by and the Sun will swell up until it swallows Mercury, Venus and Earth, and a series of cataclysms will start all over again, one after the other, at tremendous speed. Who knows where we’ll land up? So, try to enjoy this small amount of peace that we have left.’

‘Is that so?’ she says, immediately interested. ‘Well then, we mustn’t be caught unawares. I’m going to start putting aside everything that won’t go off and is not too cumbersome, so we can take it with us when the Sun explodes.’

And before the Colonel can stop her, she runs into the attic to see how many suitcases are there, what condition they’re in, and to check they lock properly. (She claims to be thinking ahead by doing so: if you’re flung out into space there is nothing worse than having to gather up the contents of suitcases that have been scattered in the midst of interstellar gas.)

‘But what’s your hurry?’ Grandfather exclaims. ‘We’ve still got several billion years in front of us, I told you!’

‘Yes, but there are so many things to be done, Eggg, and I don’t want to leave everything till the last minute. For example, I want to have some quince jam ready, in case we meet my sister Ddde, who’s crazy about it: heaven knows how long it’s been since she last tasted it, poor soul.’

‘Your sister Ddde? Is she not the one on Sirius?’

I don’t know how many there are in Grandma Ggge’s family, scattered here and there throughout every constellation: and at every cataclysm she expects she’ll meet some of them. And in fact she’s right: every time the Colonel explodes into space, he finds himself in the midst of newly acquired in-laws and cousins.

In short, there’s no stopping her now: totally caught up in her preparations, she thinks about nothing else, and leaves the most urgent chores half done, because ‘any moment now the Sun will finish’. Her husband is beside himself at this: he had dreamed so much about enjoying his retirement, allowing himself a rest amidst the ongoing conflagrations, letting the heavenly crucibles fry in their different fuels, sheltered from it all, contemplating the passing of centuries as if it were a uniform flow without any interruption, and now look what’s happened: just when they’d reached more or less the exact mid-point of the holiday, Mrs Ggge starts getting him all worked up, with the suitcases flung open on the beds, the drawers turned upside down, shirts piled on top of each other; all the thousands of millions of billions of hours and days and weeks and months that he could have enjoyed as if the holiday were endless, from now on he’ll have to live through them as though always on the point of leaving, just like when he was in active service, always waiting to be transferred. He won’t be able to forget even for an instant that everything around him is temporary, temporary but always repeated, a mosaic of protons, electrons, neutrons, that will fragment and come together again indefinitely, a soup that will be stirred until it cools or heats up: in short, this holiday in the most temperate planet in the solar system is completely ruined.

‘What do you think, Eggg, some of the crockery if it’s well wrapped up, I think we’ll be able to take that with us without it breaking …’

‘No, what are you thinking of, Ggge, with all the space it takes up, think of how many other things you’ve got to get in …’ And he is forced to take part as well, to offer an opinion on the various problems, to share her endless impatience, to live life as though it were always the day before leaving.

I know what this old pensioner is now yearning for, he’s told us clearly so many times: to be eliminated from it all once and for all, to let the stars perish and re-form and perish again a hundred thousand times, with Mrs Ggge and all his sisters-in-law in the middle chasing and embracing each other, and losing their hatboxes and umbrellas and finding them and losing them again, and him having nothing to do with any of it, staying at the bottom of matter that has been squeezed and chewed and spat out and is no use for anything … the White Dwarves!

Old Eggg is not one to talk just for the sake of it: he has a very precise plan in mind. You know those White Dwarves, those stars that are very dense and inert, the residue of the most violent explosions, searing hot from the white heat of the nuclei of metals that have been crushed and compressed inside each other? The ones that continue to go slowly round forgotten orbits, gradually turning into cold, opaque coffins for elements to be buried in? ‘Let Ggge go, let her go,’ Eggg chuckles, ‘let her get carried away by the spurts of flying electrons. I’ll wait here, until the Sun and everything that goes round it is reduced to a decrepit dwarf star; I’ll dig myself a niche amidst the hardest atoms, I’ll tolerate flames of every colour, as long as I can finally get to that dead end, that siding, as long as I can reach the shore that nobody ever leaves again.’

And he looks up with his eyes already as they will be when he is on his White Dwarf, and when the rotating of galaxies which light up and extinguish blue, yellow and red fires, and condense and dispel rainclouds and dustclouds, will no longer be the occasion for the usual conjugal bickering but something that exists, that is there, that is what it is, full stop.

And yet I believe that, at least in the early days of his stay on that deserted and forgotten star, he will want to continue mentally arguing with Ggge. It won’t be easy for him to stop. I seem to see him, alone in the void, as he travels through the expanse of light-years, but still quarrelling with his wife. That ‘I told you so’ and ‘brilliant discovery’ that accompanied the birth of the stars, the movement of galaxies, the cooling of planets, that ‘you’ll be happy now’ and ‘that’s all you ever say’ that marked every episode and phase and explosion of their quarrels and of heavenly cataclysms, that ‘you always think you’re right’ and ‘it’s because you never listen to me’ without which the history of the universe would not have for him any name or memory or flavour, that eternal conjugal bickering: if ever it should one day come to an end, what a feeling of desolation, what emptiness!





Solar Storm




The Sun is subject to continuous internal perturbations of its gaseous incandescent matter, which appear as upheavals that are visible on its surface: solar prominences that burst like bubbles, spots of diminished luminosity, intense flares from which sudden jets shoot up. When the Sun emits a cloud of electricized gas and this hits the Earth crossing the Van Allen radiation belts, magnetic storms occur as well as phenomena such as the Aurora Borealis.

There are people for whom the Sun provides a sense of security – said Qfwfq – stability, protection. Not me.

They say: ‘Here it is, the Sun, it’s always been there, it nourishes us, warms us, high above the clouds and the wind, radiant, always constant, the Earth goes round it subject to cataclysms and storms, and what about the Sun? It’s always there in its place, calm and impassive.’ Don’t believe a word of it. What we call the Sun is nothing but a continuous detonation of gas, an explosion that’s been lasting for five billion years and still hasn’t stopped spewing up stuff; it’s a typhoon of fire, shapeless and lawless, threatening constant aggression, totally unpredictable. And we’re inside it: it’s not true that we are here and the Sun is there; it’s all a constant whirlpool of concentric currents with no intervals between them, a single tissue of matter, denser in some places, less dense in others, stemming from the same original cloud that has contracted and caught fire.

Of course, the amount of matter that the Sun chucks down here – particle fragments, shattered atoms – arranging itself along the lines of force of the magnet that passes from one pole to the other, has formed a kind of invisible shell enfolding the Earth, and we can even pretend that ours is a separate world, where causes and effects answer to certain laws, which if we know them we can master them, safe from the maelstrom of chaotic elements whirling around us.

I, for instance, have obtained a long-haul captain’s licence and taken command of the steamer Halley: in the log I make note of the latitude, longitude, winds, data from the meteorological instruments, radio messages; I have learned to share your confidence in the fragile conventions that govern life on Earth. What more could I want? Our route is certain, the sea is calm, tomorrow we will be within sight of the familiar Welsh coasts, and in two days we will enter the tarry Mersey estuary, and cast anchor in the port of Liverpool, the end of our voyage. My life is regulated by a calendar that is plotted down to the smallest details: I count the days that separate me from the next voyage, and which I will spend in my house in the Lancashire countryside.

Mr Evans, the mate, appears at the door to the bridge, and says with a smile, ‘Lovely Sun, Sir.’ I nod, because really the Sun has an extraordinary clearness about it for the time of year and the latitude; if I sharpen my gaze (I who have the gift of being able to look straight into the Sun without being blinded) I can clearly make out the corona and chromosphere and the position of the sunspots, and I notice … I notice things that it is pointless to tell you people about: cataclysms that are even at this moment shattering its fiery depths, continents that are collapsing in flames, incandescent oceans swelling and overflowing out of the crucible, turning into currents of invisible radiation heading towards the Earth, almost as fast as light.

The choking voice of the helmsman Adams sounds in my loudspeaker: ‘The compass needle, Sir, the compass needle! What the hell is going on? It’s going round and round like a roulette wheel!’

‘Is he drunk?!’ Evans exclaims, but I know that everything is under control, that it is now that everything starts to be under control, I know that in a second Simmons the radio operator will rush in here. Here he is arriving, his eyes popping out of their sockets: he almost knocks Evans down on the threshold.

‘Everything’s dead, Sir! I was listening to the semi-final of the boxing match and it’s all gone dead! I can’t establish radio contact with any station!’

‘What shall I do, Captain?’ Adams shouts into the phone. ‘The compass has gone mad!’

Evans is as white as a sheet.

This is the moment to make my superiority felt. ‘Calm down, everyone, we’ve run into a magnetic storm. There’s nothing to do. Commend your souls to whatever it is you believe in, and keep calm.’

I go out on to the fo’c’sle. The sea is still, hardened to enamel by the Sun at the zenith. In this calm of the elements, the Halley has become a mass of blind iron that all the arts and genius of man are powerless to control. We are sailing in the Sun, inside a solar explosion where neither compasses nor radios are of any use. We have always been in the Sun’s control, even though we almost always managed to forget it and to think that we were sheltered from its whims.

It was then that I saw her. I looked up to the foremast: she was up there. She was holding on to the foreyard, hanging in the air like a flag unfurling for miles and miles around, her hair flying in the wind, and her whole body flowing like her hair because it was made of the same pulviscular substance, her arms with their thin wrists and their ample shoulders, her loins sickle-shaped like a crescent moon, her breasts like a cloud covering the ship’s quarterdeck, and the spirals of her drapery mingling with the smoke from the funnel and with the sky above. All this I could see in the invisible electricization of the air; or at times it was just her face, like an aerial figurehead, the head of a monumental Medusa, with crackling eyes and locks: Rah had managed to catch up with me.

‘Are you there, Rah?’ I said. ‘You’ve tracked me down.’

‘Why did you hide down here?’

‘I wanted to see if there was another way of being.’

‘And is there?’

‘Here I guide boats on routes marked out with the compass, I can orientate myself with this compass, my instruments pick up radio waves, everything that happens has a reason.’

‘And you believe that?’

From the radio cabin we could hear Simmons’s curses, as he tried to pick up any station at all in the crackle of electric charges.

‘No, but I like to act as if it was like that, to play the game right to the end,’ I said to Rah.

‘And when you see that it’s impossible?’

‘One just drifts. But we’re always ready to seize control again at any moment.’

‘Are you speaking to yourself, Sir?’ It was Evans who was always poking his sallow face in.

I tried to assert myself. ‘Go and give Adams a hand, Mr Evans. The oscillations of the magnetic needle will tend to repeat themselves obeying certain constants. One can work out an approximate route, as we wait to orientate ourselves by the stars, tonight.’

At night, the streaks of an Aurora Borealis arched up into the sky’s vault above us as though on the back of a tiger. With her flaming locks and sumptuous raiment, Rah paraded above us, hanging from the yards. Finding our bearings again was out of the question.

‘We’ve ended up at the Pole,’ said Adams, just to show he had some spirit; he was well aware that magnetic storms can cause an Aurora Borealis at any latitude.

I watched Rah in the night: her gorgeous hair, her jewels, her flashing clothes. ‘You’re dressed for a ball,’ I said.

‘I have to properly celebrate finding you again,’ she replied.

For me there was nothing to celebrate; I had fallen back under her old spell; my patient plan had failed. ‘You do get more and more beautiful,’ I admitted.

‘Why did you escape? You’ve ended up in this hole, let yourself get caught in a trap, reduced to the dimensions of a world where everything is limited.’

‘I am here of my own free will,’ I retorted, but I knew she would not understand. For her our life was in the freedom of space criss-crossed by rays of light, amidst the bursts of solar explosions that constantly buffeted us this way and that, outside all dimensions and forms.

‘Still your old game of pretending it’s you who choose, decide, determine,’ said Rah. ‘Your old flaw.’

‘And you? How did you get here?’ I asked. Was the ionosphere not an impregnable barrier? So often I had heard Rah graze against it like a butterfly beating its wings against the window of a room. ‘You still haven’t told me how you got in.’

She shrugged. ‘A burst of rays, a hole in the ceiling; now here I am down to get you.’

‘To get me? But it’s you who are trapped. How will you get back out?’

‘I’ll stay here. I’m staying with you,’ she said.

‘Disaster, Sir!’ Simmons was racing along the deck towards me. ‘All the radio installations on board have packed up!’

Evans was hidden behind a hatchway, and he seized the radio operator by his arm; he was saying – I worked this out from his gestures – that it was pointless to turn to me, the magnetic storm had addled my brain, that I talked to myself, staring up at the masts.

I tried to re-establish my authority: ‘The ocean is crossed by powerful electric currents,’ I explained, ‘the tension in the wires increases, the valves go, it’s all normal …’ But by now they were looking at me with eyes that no longer showed any respect for my rank.

The next day the effects of the magnetic storm had ceased to be felt all over the ocean except on board our ship, and for a wide area around. The Halley continued to drag Rah along behind it, languidly reclining in the air, hanging on by a finger to the radar, the lightning conductor or the smokestack. The compass was like a fish floundering in a tub, the radio continued to boil like a pan of chickpeas. The ships that had been sent to our aid could not find us: their instruments broke down as soon as they got close.

At night luminous streaks hovered above the Halley; it was an Aurora Borealis all to ourselves, as though it was our flag. This was what allowed the aid ships to track us down. Without getting too close in case they got infected by what seemed a mysterious magnetic disease, they guided us into the Liverpool roadstead.

The story began to spread through every harbour: wherever the captain of the Halley went, he carried around with him electric storms and an Aurora Borealis. Furthermore, my officers told everyone around that I had links with invisible powers. Naturally I lost the command of the Halley, and there was no way of obtaining other captaincies. Luckily, with the savings from my years of sailing I had bought an old house in the country, in Lancashire, where – as I said – I used to stay between one voyage and another, and where I could devote myself to my beloved experiments in the measurement and prediction of natural phenomena. I had filled the house with precision instruments I had made myself, among which there was a monochrome heliograph. Every time I got back on shore, I could not wait to lock myself away with all those gadgets.

So I retired to Lancashire, with my wife Rah. Immediately the televisions of other house-owners started to go wrong, for an area of several miles around. There was no way of getting any broadcast into focus: on the screen black and white streaks whirled around as though a flea-ridden zebra had come on.

I knew there were rumours about us but I wasn’t worried: it seemed they were annoyed above all by my experiments; they were still living in the time when my machines actually worked; maybe they did not yet suspect anything about my wife – they had never seen her, they didn’t know that in our house no device could work any more, that we did not even have electric light.

Nevertheless, the one thing you could see coming from our windows at night was the light of candles and this gave our house a sinister air: in those days many people stayed up at night to see the flashes of the Aurora Borealis which had become a feature of our region; no wonder suspicions about us increased. Subsequently migrating birds could be seen losing their sense of direction: storks arrived in the middle of winter, and albatrosses swooped down on the moors.

One day I received a visit from the vicar, the Reverend Collins.

‘I would like to have a word with you, Captain –’ and he gave a little cough – ‘about certain phenomena which have been taking place in the parish, you know? And about certain rumours that are going around …’

He was on the threshold. I invited him in. He was unable to conceal his amazement at seeing everything in pieces in our house: shards of glass, dynamo brushes, bits of nautical maps, everything in chaos.

‘But this is not the house I visited last Easter …’ he muttered.

I too was for a second seized by a nostalgia for my ordered, well-equipped and fully functioning laboratory, which I had let him visit the previous year. (The Reverend Collins was very careful to keep courteous relations with the local inhabitants, especially with those who never set foot in church.)

I recovered my composure. ‘Yes, well, we’ve changed the layout a bit …’

The vicar immediately came to the point of his visit. All the strange things that happened after I had returned to live there, as a married man (he emphasized this phrase), were linked in public opinion with my person, or with Mrs Qfwfq (I gave a start), though nobody had yet had the good fortune, he said, to have met her. I said nothing in reply. ‘You know what people are like around here,’ the Reverend Collins went on, ‘there’s still so much ignorance, so much superstition … One cannot, of course, believe everything they say …’ And it was not clear whether he had come to apologize for the hostility of his parishioners towards me, or to establish how much truth there was in what they said. ‘There are completely groundless rumours. Just imagine what I’ve heard said: that your wife has been seen at night flying above the rooftops and swinging on the television aerials. “What?” I asked, “and what does this Mrs Qfwfq look like? Like an imp, an elf?” “No,” they replied, “she is a giantess who is always stretched out in the air like a cloud …’ ”

‘No, that’s impossible, I assure you,’ I began, though I was not quite clear what I was trying to deny. ‘Rah has to lie out because of her physical condition … you understand? And that is why we prefer not to socialize … but she stays at home … Rah is nearly always in the house now … If you want, I’ll introduce her to you …’

Naturally the Reverend Collins leaped at the chance. I had to lead him to the garage, a big, old garage-cum-storehouse which at one time, when this property was a farm, had been used for threshing-machines and for drying hay. There were no windows, light filtered in through the cracks, and you could see the dust-beams hanging in the air. And in the midst of the dustclouds Rah was clearly visible. She took up the whole of the garage, lying on her side, curled up into a ball, one hand holding her knee, and the other stroking a Rutherford coil as though it was an Angora cat. She kept her head down because the ceiling was a bit low for her; her eyes were half closed on account of the sparks that showered from the copper wire of the coil each time her hand rose up to stifle a yawn.

‘Poor thing, shut up like this, she’s a bit bored, she’s not really used to it,’ I tried to explain, but it was something else I would have liked to articulate: the pride that filled my heart at that sight. This is what I would have said, had there been anyone able to understand me: ‘See how she’s changed: when she came here, she was a fury; who would ever have thought I’d be able to live with this tempest, to contain it and tame it?’

Lost in such thoughts, I had almost forgotten about the vicar. I turned round. He was no longer there. He’d escaped! There he was racing away, jumping the hedges, vaulting over them with his umbrella.

Now I’m waiting for the worst. I know that my neighbours have banded together in armed gangs, surrounding the hill. I hear the dogs barking, people shouting to each other, every now and then the rustling of leaves from a hideout where they are spying on me from a hedge. They are about to attack the house, perhaps to set it on fire: I can see a number of lit torches scattered all around. I don’t know whether they are intending to take us alive, or lynch us, or kill us off in the flames. Perhaps it’s my wife they want to burn as a witch; or maybe they have realized that she will never allow herself to be taken?

I look at the Sun: it looks as if it has entered into a phase of tumultuous activity; the sun-spots are diminishing; bubbles that are a hundred times more bright are spreading all over it. Now I open the garage and allow the light to stream in. I wait for a more powerful explosion to fling an electric spark into space, and that way the Sun will stretch out its arms all the way here, it will rend the veil that separates us, will come and take back its daughter, and let her return to her headlong runs over the endless plains of outer space.

Soon all the televisions in the area will start working again, the images of detergents and beautiful girls will occupy the screen again, these gangs of persecutors will disperse, everyone will go back to their ration of daily rationality. I too will be able to reassemble my laboratory, go back to the way of life I had chosen, before this enforced interruption.

But do not think that, even with Rah on my back, I have ever strayed from the line of conduct I had set for myself; do not believe that I surrendered at any point, seeing that I could not escape from Rah, that she was too strong. I had come up with a plan that was even more difficult, to replace the one that had been forestalled by Rah, a plan that depended on Rah, or in spite of Rah, or rather because of Rah, or more accurately a plan created out of love for Rah, the only way to bring to fulfilment the love between the two of us: to plan, in the midst of that shattering of instruments, in that dustcloud of vibrations, other instruments, other measurements, other calculations that would allow us to know and control the interplanetary sun-storm that pervades and shakes and judders and conditions us, something beyond our illusory ionized umbrella. That was what I wanted. And now that she is rising like a lightning-bolt towards the sphere of fire, and I am coming back to being master of myself, I begin to gather the fragments of my machines. This is the point when I see how pathetic are the powers that I have recovered.

My persecutors have not yet noticed anything. Here they are arriving, armed with pitchforks and rifles and sticks.

‘Are you happy now?’ I shout. ‘She’s not here any more! Go back to your compasses, to your television programmes! Everything is in order! Rah’s gone. But you don’t realize what you’ve lost. You don’t know what my plan was, my plan for you, you don’t know what Rah’s presence might have meant for us, disastrous, unbearable Rah, for me and for you who are about to lynch me!’

They’ve stopped. They don’t understand what I’m saying, they don’t believe me, they don’t know whether to be afraid or be encouraged by it. In any case, I don’t understand what I’ve said either, I don’t believe myself, I don’t know whether to feel relieved either, and I’m afraid too.





Shells and Time




Documentation on life on Earth, which is very scarce for the Precambrian period, suddenly starts to become extremely plentiful from about 520 million years ago, for in the Cambrian and Ordovician periods living organisms begin to secrete calcareous shells that will be preserved as fossils in geological strata.

Who do you think admitted you to that dimension in which you are all immersed, so much so that you believe you were born into it and for it, who do you think opened the breach for you? It was me – Qfwfq’s voice could be heard exclaiming, from underneath a shell – me, a lowly mollusc condemned to my moment-by-moment existence, a prisoner of an eternal present. It’s pointless you pretending to understand; you can’t guess what I’m talking about. I’m talking of time. If it hadn’t been for me, time would never have existed.

Because, listen carefully, I had no idea what time might be like, and I didn’t even have any idea that something like time could ever exist. Days and nights crashed over me like waves, all interchangeable, identical or marked by totally fortuitous differences, a toing and froing where it was impossible to establish any sense or norm. However, in constructing my shell, the intention I had for it was already in some sense connected with time, an intention to separate my present from the corrosive dissolution of all presents, to keep it out, to set it apart. The present landed on me with so many different aspects I could not establish any succession: waves, nights, afternoons, ebbs, winters, quarters of the moon, tides, summer heatwaves; my fear was of losing myself in all this, of splitting myself up into as many myselves as there were bits of the present that were dumped on me, layer after layer, and that for all I knew might all have been simultaneous, each one inhabited by a bit of myself that was contemporaneous with all the other bits.

I had to start by fixing some signs in this immeasurable continuum, by establishing a series of intervals; in other words, numbers. The calcareous matter I secreted, making it whirl like a spiral on top of itself, was precisely that, something that continued uninterrupted; but meantime, at every turn of the spiral, it separated the edge of one spiral from the edge of another, so that if I wanted to count something I could start by counting these spirals. In short, what I wanted to construct was a time that belonged to me alone, regulated solely by myself, self-contained: a clock that did not have to report to anyone what it was measuring. I would have liked to construct an extremely long, unbroken shell-time, to continue my spiral without ever stopping.

I went to it with all my strength, and of course I wasn’t the only one: at the same time, many others were trying to build their own endless shells. Whether I or someone else succeeded was not important: all it needed was for one of us to manage to make an endless spiral and time would exist, that would be time. But now I come to the most difficult thing of all to say (also the most difficult thing to reconcile with the fact that I am here speaking to you): to talk of time, that thing that never stays up, that unravels, that collapses like a bank of sand, that is as multifaceted as saline crystals, as ramified as a coral reef, as porous as a sponge (and I am not going to tell you which hole, what breach I went through to get all the way to here). The infinite spiral proved impossible to make: the shell grew and grew, and at a certain point stopped – that was it, finished. Another one started up somewhere else, thousands of shells started every second, thousands and thousands continued to grow in every phase of the winding of the spiral, and all of them sooner or later would suddenly stop, and the waves would drag away an empty container.

It was wasted effort on our part: time refused to last, it was a friable substance, destined to crumble into pieces; ours were only illusions of time that lasted as long as the length of a tiny shell-spiral, splinters of time that were detached and different from each other, one here and another there, not linkable or comparable to each other.

And on the remains of our unstinting labour sand would settle, sand which, at irregular gusts of wind, sand-time would lift up and let fall, burying the empty shells beneath successive layers in the belly of plateaux that had emerged and were subsequently submerged when the seas reconquered the continents and covered them with new showers of empty shells. Thus the substance of the world was made up of the substance of our defeat.

How could we have thought that that cemetery of all our shells was the real shell, the one we had tried to construct with all our strength, and thought we had failed to construct? Now it is clear that the construction of time consisted precisely in the very defeat of our attempts to construct it; except that we had not worked for ourselves but for you. We molluscs, who first had the intention of lasting, have given our kingdom, time, to the most volatile race of inhabitants of the temporary, namely humanity: had it not been for us they would never have thought of it. It needed the cross-section of the Earth’s crust to throw up our shells, which we had abandoned some hundred, three hundred, five hundred million years before, for the vertical dimension of time to open up to you and release you from the continual cycle of the stars’ circuit in which you continue to pigeonhole the course of your fragmentary existences.

I’m not saying that you too don’t take some of the credit; after all it was you who discovered how to read what was written between the lines of the Earth’s notebook (there, I’m using your usual metaphor of things that are written; there’s no getting away from it: this is the proof that we are in your territory now, not mine), it was you who managed to spell out the distorted characters of our stammering alphabet that lay scattered amidst thousand-year intervals of silence, you who extracted from all this a whole coherent discourse, a discourse about you. But tell me, how would you have been able to read in the middle of all that stuff, if we hadn’t written there, though we didn’t know what it was we were writing, or rather, if we, while knowing full well what would happen, had not wanted to write (I may as well continue with your metaphors while I’m at it), to signpost, to act as a sign, to act as a relationship or link between ourselves and others, to be something which, existing as it is in and of itself, is nevertheless happy to be something different for others …

Someone had to start not so much to construct as to become, to become something, to come into being in what it was making, to ensure that everything that was left or buried was a sign of something else, the imprint of fish-bones in clay, the carbonized petroliferous forests, the Texas dinosaur’s footprint in the mud of the Cretaceous period, the splintered pebbles of the Palaeolithic period, the mammoth’s carcass found in the Beresovka tundra with the remains of the buttercups it had grazed on twelve thousand years previously still in its teeth, the Venus of Willendorf, the ruins of Ur, the Dead Sea Scrolls, the Lombard spear-tip that popped up at Torcello, the Templars’ temple, the treasure of the Incas, the Winter Palace and the Smolny Institute, the car cemetery …

Starting with our interrupted spirals, you have put together a continuous spiral you call history. I don’t know if you’ve got that much to be happy about; I can’t make any judgement on this thing that isn’t mine: for me this is only time as a footprint, the trace of our failed enterprise, the reverse of time, a stratification of remains and shells and necropolises and registers, of what has been saved as it perishes, of what by stopping has managed to reach you. Your history is the opposite of ours, the opposite of the history of what by moving has not arrived, of what has been lost in order to survive: the hand that modelled the vase, the bookcases that burned at Alexandria, the way the scribe spoke, the flesh of the mollusc that secreted the shell …





World Memory




Here’s why I called for you, Müller. Now that my resignation has been accepted, you are to be my successor: your appointment as director is imminent. Please don’t pretend this is such a big surprise: the rumour has been doing the rounds for some time and I’m sure you will have heard it yourself. Then, there’s no doubt that of the young élite in our organization, you are the most competent, the one who knows, you could say, all the secrets of our work. Or so at least it would seem. Allow me to explain: I am not speaking to you on my own initiative, I was told to do so by our superiors. There are only one or two things you don’t yet know, Müller, and the time has come to fill you in. You imagine, as does everybody else for that matter, that our organization has for many years been preparing the greatest document centre ever conceived, an archive that will bring together and catalogue everything that is known about every person, animal and thing, by way of a general inventory not only of the present but of the past too, of everything that has ever been since time began, in short a general and simultaneous history of everything, or rather a catalogue of everything moment by moment. And that is indeed what we are working on and we can feel satisfied that the project is well advanced: not only have we already put the contents of the most important libraries of the world, and likewise the archives and museums and newspaper annals of every nation, on our punch cards, but also a great deal of documentation gathered ad hoc, person by person, place by place. And all this material is being put through a reduction process that brings it down to the essential, condensed, miniaturized minimum, a process whose limits have yet to be established; just as all existing and possible images are being filed in minute spools of microfilm, while microscopic bobbins of magnetic tape hold all sounds that have ever been and ever can be recorded. What we are planning to build is a centralized archive of humankind, and we are attempting to store it in the smallest possible space, along the lines of the individual memories in our brains.

But it’s hardly worth my while repeating this to someone who won admission to our organization with a project entitled ‘The British Museum in a Nutshell’. Relatively speaking, you have only been with us a few years, but by now you are as familiar with the workings of our laboratories as I myself, who am or was the foundation’s director. I would never have left this job, I assure you, if I still felt I had the energy. But since my wife’s mysterious disappearance, I have sunk into a depression from which I still have not recovered. It is only right that our superiors – accepting what are anyway my own wishes – should decide to replace me. Hence it falls to me to inform you of those official secrets which have so far been kept from you.

What you are not aware of is the true purpose of our work. It has to do with the end of the world, Müller. We are working in expectation of an imminent disappearance of life on Earth. We are working so that all may not have been in vain, so that we can transmit all we know to others, even though we don’t know who they are or what they know.

May I offer you a cigar? Forecasts that the Earth will not be able to support life, or at least human life, for much longer should not distress us unduly. We have all been aware for some time that the Sun is halfway through its lifespan: however well things went, in four or five billion years everything would be over. That is, in a short while the problem would have presented itself anyway; what is new is that the deadline is now very much nearer, we have no time to lose, that’s all. Obviously the extinction of our species is not a happy prospect, but crying about it offers only the same empty consolation as when we mourn the death of an individual. (I’m still thinking of my dear Angela, do forgive my emotion.) There are doubtless millions of planets supporting life forms similar to our own; it hardly matters whether our image lives on in them or whether it be their descendants rather than our own who carry on where we left off. What does matter is that we give them our memory, the general memory put together by the organization of which you, Müller, are about to be made director.

No need to be overawed; the scope of your work will remain as it is at present. The system for communicating our memory to other planets is being designed by another sector of the organization; we already have our work cut out, we needn’t even concern ourselves whether they decide on optical or acoustic media. It may even be that it’s not a question of transmitting information at all, but of putting it in a safe place, beneath the Earth’s crust: wandering through space the remains of our planet may one day be found and explored by extra-galactic archaeologists. Nor do we even have to worry about what code or codes will be chosen: there’s a sector exclusively dedicated to looking for a way of making our stock of information intelligible whatever linguistic system the others may use. For you, now that you know, I can assure you that nothing has changed, except the responsibility that rests on your shoulders. That’s what I wanted to talk over with you a little.

What will the human race be at the moment of its extinction? A certain quantity of information about itself and the world, a finite quantity, given that it will no longer be able to propagate itself and grow. For a certain time, the universe enjoyed an excellent opportunity to gather and elaborate information; and to create it, to bring forth information there where in other circumstances there would have been no one to inform and nothing to inform them about: such was life on Earth, and above all human life, its memory, its inventions for communicating and remembering. Our organization can guarantee that this body of information will not be lost, regardless of whether it is actually passed on to others or not. The duty of the director is to make sure that nothing is left out, because what is left out is as if it had never been. At the same time it will also be your duty to treat any element that might end up causing confusion, or obscuring more essential elements, as if it had never been – everything, that is, that rather than increasing the body of information would generate pointless clutter and clatter. What matters is the general model constituted by the whole of our information, from which further information, which we are not giving or perhaps don’t have, may be deduced. In short, by not giving certain kinds of information, one is giving more than one would if one did. The final result of our work will be a model in which everything counts as information, even what isn’t there. Only then will it be possible to say what really mattered out of all that has been, or rather what really was, since the final state of our archive will constitute at once that which is, has been and will be, and all else is nothing.

Of course there are moments in our work – you will have experienced them too, Müller – when one is tempted to imagine that the only things that matter are those which elude our archives, that only what passes without leaving any trace truly exists, while everything held in our records is dead detritus, the leftovers, the waste. The moment comes when a yawn, a buzzing fly, an itch seem the only treasure there is, precisely because completely unusable, occurring once and for all and then promptly forgotten, spared the monotonous destiny of being stored in the world memory. Who could rule out the possibility that the universe consists of the discontinuous network of moments that cannot be recorded, and that our organization does nothing but establish their negative image, a frame around emptiness and meaninglessness?

But the quirk of our profession is this: that as soon as we concentrate on something, we immediately want to include it in our files; with the result, I confess, that I have often found myself cataloguing yawns, pimples, unhelpful associations of ideas, little tunes I’ve whistled, and then hiding them among the mass of more useful information. For the position of director which you are about to be offered brings with it this privilege: the right to put one’s personal imprint on the world memory. Please understand me, Müller: I’m not talking about arbitrary liberties or an abuse of power, but of an indispensable element in our work. A mass of coldly objective and incontrovertible information would run the risk of presenting a far from truthful picture, of falsifying what is most specific in any situation. Suppose we received from another planet a message made up of pure facts, facts of such clarity as to be merely obvious: we wouldn’t pay attention, we would hardly even notice; only a message containing something unexpressed, something doubtful and partially indecipherable, would break through the threshold of our consciousness and demand to be received and interpreted. We must bear this in mind: the director’s task is that of giving the whole of the data gathered and selected by our offices that slight subjective slant, that touch of the opinionated, the rash, which it needs in order to be true. That’s what I wanted to warn you about, before handing over: in the material gathered to date you will notice here and there the mark of my own hand – an extremely delicate one, you understand – a sprinkling of appraisals, of facts withheld, even lies.

Only in a superficial sense can lies be said to exclude the truth; you will be aware that in many cases lies – the patient’s lies to the psychoanalyst, for example – are just as revealing as the truth, if not more so; and the same will be true for those who eventually interpret our message. What I’m telling you now, Müller, I’m no longer telling you because instructed to do so by our superiors, but drawing on my own personal experience, speaking as colleague to colleague, man to man. Listen: the lie is the real information we have to pass on. Hence I didn’t wish to deny myself a discreet use of lying where it didn’t complicate the message, but on the contrary simplified it. When it came to information about myself in particular, I felt it legitimate to indulge in all kinds of details that are not true (I don’t see how this could bother anyone). My life with Angela, for example: I described it as I would have liked it to be, a great love story, where Angela and I appear as two eternal lovebirds happy in the midst of every kind of adversity, passionate, faithful. It wasn’t exactly like that, Müller: Angela married me out of convenience and immediately regretted it, our life was one long trail of sourness and subterfuge. But what does it matter what happened day by day? In the world memory Angela’s image is definitive, perfect, nothing can taint it and I will always be the most enviable husband there ever was.

At first all I had to do was to apply some cosmetics to the data our everyday life provided. But there came the point when the facts I found myself confronted with as I watched Angela day by day (then spied on her, finally followed her) became increasingly contradictory and ambiguous, such as to justify the worst suspicions. What was I to do, Müller? Muddy that image of Angela at once so clear, so easy to transmit, so loved and lovable, was I to make it incomprehensible, to darken the most brilliant light in all our archives? I didn’t hesitate, day after day I eliminated these facts. But I was constantly afraid that some clue, some intimation, some hint from which one might deduce what she, what Angela did and was in this transitory life, might still be hovering around her definitive image. I spent the days in the laboratory, selecting, cancelling, omitting. I was jealous, Müller: not jealous of the transitory Angela – that was a game I’d already lost – but jealous of that information-Angela who would live as long as the universe itself.

If the information-Angela was not to be contaminated, the first thing that must be done was to stop the living Angela from constantly superimposing herself on that image. It was then that Angela disappeared and all searches for her proved vain. It would be pointless, Müller, for me to tell you now how I managed to get rid of the body piece by piece. Please, keep calm, these details are of no importance as far as our work is concerned, since in the world memory I remain that happy husband and later inconsolable widower you all know. But this didn’t bring peace of mind: the information-Angela was still part of an information system where certain data might lend themselves to being interpreted – whether because of disturbances in transmission, or some malevolence on the part of the decoder – as ambiguous conjectures, insinuations, slander. I decided to destroy all references to people Angela could have had relationships with. I was sad about that, since there will now be no trace of some of our colleagues in the world memory; it will be as though they had never existed.

You imagine I’m telling you all this in order to seek your complicity, Müller. But that’s not the case. I feel obliged to inform you of the extreme measures I am being forced to take to make sure that information relative to everybody who might have been my wife’s lover is excluded from the archives. I am not worried about any repercussions on myself; the few years that remain for me to live are a trifle compared to the eternity I am used to measuring things against; and the person I really was has already been definitively established and consigned to the punch cards.

If there is nothing that needs correcting in the world memory, the only thing left to do is to correct reality where it doesn’t agree with that memory. Just as I cancelled the existence of my wife’s lover from the punch cards, so I must cancel him from the world of the living. Which is why I am now pulling out my gun and pointing it at you, Müller, why I’m squeezing the trigger, killing you.





From Cosmicomics Old and New



Nothing and Not Much




‘Calculations made by the physicist Alan Guth of the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center suggest that the universe was created literally from nothing in an extremely short space of time: a second divided by a billion billion billions’ (from the Washington Post, 3 June 1984).

If I tell you I remember it – began Qfwfq – you will object that in nothingness, nothing can remember anything, nor be remembered by anything, which is one reason why you won’t be able to believe so much as a word of what I am about to tell you. Tough arguments to knock down, I admit. All I can tell you is that the moment there was something, there being nothing else, that something was the universe, and since it hadn’t been there before, there was a before when it wasn’t and an afterwards when it was; from that moment on, I’m saying, time began, and with time memory, and with memory someone who remembered, that is to say myself, or that something that later I would understand was myself. Let’s get this straight: it’s not that I remembered how I was when there was nothing, because there was no time then, and there was no me; but I realized now that, even if I didn’t know I was there, still I had a place I could have been, I mean the universe; whereas before, even had I wanted to, I wouldn’t have known where to put myself, and that’s a pretty big difference, and it was precisely this difference between the before and the after that I remembered. In short, you must recognize that my reasoning is logical too, and what’s more doesn’t err on the side of the simplistic like your own.

So let me explain. One can’t even say for sure that what there was then, really was: the particles, or rather the ingredients with which the particles would later be made, existed in the virtual sense: that kind of existence where if you’re there you’re there, and if you’re not there you can begin to count on being there and then see what happens. We felt this was a fine thing, and indeed it was, because it’s only if you begin to exist in the virtual sense, to fluctuate in a field of probability, to borrow and return charges of energy still entirely hypothetical, that sooner or later you may find yourself existing in reality, wrapping around yourself, one might say, a scrap, be it ever so small, of space-time, as happened to an ever-increasing number of I-don’t-know-whats – let’s call them neutrinos because it’s a nice name, though at the time no one had ever even dreamed of them – bobbing one on top of another in a torrid soup of infinite heat, thick as a glue of infinite density, that swelled up in a time so infinitely brief that it had nothing to do with time at all – since of course time hadn’t yet had the time to show what it would later become – and as it swelled it produced space where no one had ever known what space was. Thus the universe, from being an infinitesimal pimple in the smoothness of nothing expanded in a flash to the size of a proton, then an atom, then a pinpoint, then a pinhead, then a teaspoon, then a hat, then an umbrella …

No, I’m going too fast; or too slow, I don’t know: because this expansion of the universe was infinitely fast yet started out from a beginning so deeply buried in nothing that to push its way out and peep over the threshold of space and time required a wrench of such violence as not to be measurable in terms of space and time. Let’s say that, to tell everything that happened in the first second of the history of the universe, I should have to put together an account so long that the whole subsequent duration of the universe with its millions of centuries past and future would not be enough; whereas everything that came afterwards I could polish off in five minutes.

Naturally enough our belonging to a universe without precedent or terms of comparison very soon became a cause of pride, boasting, infatuation. The split-second yawning of unimaginable distances, the profusion of corpuscles squirting all over the place – hadrons, baryons, mesons, a quark or two – the reckless speed of time, taken all together these things gave us a sense of invincibility, of power, of pride, and at the same time of conceit, as if all this was no more than our due. The only comparison we could draw was with the nothing that had come before: and we put the thought behind us, as of something petty and wretched, deserving only of commiseration, or scorn. Every thought we had embraced the whole, disdained the parts; the whole was our element, and it included time too, all time, the future holding thrall over the past in terms both of quantity and fullness. Our destiny lay in more, more and more, and we couldn’t think, even fleetingly, of less: from now on we would go from more to even more, from additions to multiplications to exponentials, without ever slowing down or stopping.

That there was an underlying insecurity in this excitement, a craving almost to cancel out the shadow of our so recent origins, is something I have perhaps only recently come to appreciate, in the light of all I have learned since; unless it was already secretly gnawing away inside me even then. For despite our certainty that the whole was our natural habitat, it was nevertheless true that we had come from nothing, that we had only just raised ourselves up from absolute deprivation, that only a fragile sliver of space-time lay between ourselves and our previous condition of being without substance, extension or duration. I would be seized by fleeting but intense sensations of precariousness, as if this whole that was struggling to develop were unable to hide its intrinsic fragility, the underlying emptiness to which we might well return with the same speed with which we had emerged. Hence my impatience with the universe’s indecisiveness in taking on a form, as if I couldn’t wait for that vertiginous expansion to stop, so I could discover its limits, for better or worse, but mainly so that its existence should stabilize; and hence too my fear, a fear I could not stifle, that as soon as the expansion let up, the contraction phase would begin at once with an equally precipitate return to non-being.

I reacted by leaping to the other extreme: ‘Completeness! Completeness!’ I proclaimed far and wide; ‘The future!’ I cheered; ‘I want immensity!’ I insisted, shoving my way through that confused mill of forces; ‘Let potential be potent!’ I incited; ‘Let the act act! Let probabilities be proven!’ I already felt that the barrages of particles (or were they only radiations?) included every possible form and force, and the more I looked forward to being surrounded by a universe populated with active presences, the more I felt that those presences were affected by a criminal inertia, an abnegatory abulia.

Some of these presences were, well, let’s say they were feminine, I mean they had propulsive charges complementary to my own; one in particular attracted my attention; haughty and reserved, she would establish a field of languid, long-limbed forces around her. To get her to notice me, I redoubled my exhibitions of excitement at the prodigality of the universe, flaunted a nonchalant ease in drawing on cosmic resources, as if they’d always been available to me, and thrust ahead in space and time as though always expecting things to improve. Convinced that Nugkta (I call her by the name I would learn later on) was different from all the others, in the sense of more aware of what it meant to be, and to participate in something that is, I tried by every means available to distinguish myself from the hesitant mass of those who were slow to get used to this idea. The result was that I made myself tiresome and unpleasant to everybody, without this bringing me any closer to her.

I was getting everything wrong. It didn’t take me long to realize that Nugkta didn’t appreciate my extravagant efforts at all; on the contrary she took care not to give me any sign of attention, apart from the occasional snort of annoyance. She went on keeping herself to herself, somewhat listlessly, as though crouched with her chin on her knees, protruding elbows hugging long folded legs (don’t misunderstand me: I describe the position she would have assumed if one could have spoken then of knees, legs and elbows; or better still, it was the universe that was crouched over itself, and for those in it there was no other position to assume; just that some, for example Nugkta, did it more naturally). Lavishly, I scattered the treasures of the universe at her feet, but the way she accepted them it was as if to say: ‘Is that all?’ At first, I thought this indifference was affectation, then I realized she wanted to teach me something, to suggest I assume a more controlled attitude. My wild enthusiasm must have made her think me ingenuous, mindless, a greenhorn.

There was nothing for it but to change my attitude, behaviour, style. My relationship with the universe should be the practical, factual approach of one capable of assessing the objective value of the evolution of any given thing, however immense, without letting it go to his head. That was how I hoped to come across to her, more convincing, promising, trustworthy. Did I succeed? Not a bit of it. The more I banked on solidity, on what was feasible, quantifiable, the more I felt I was coming across as a braggart, a con man.

In the end I began to see the light: there was only one thing worthy of admiration as she saw it, only one value, and that was nothingness. It wasn’t that she had a low opinion of me, but of the universe. Everything in existence carried some original defect within itself: being, to her mind, was a depressing, vulgar degeneration of non-being.

To say that this discovery upset me would be an understatement: it was an affront to all my beliefs, my craving for completeness, my immense expectations. What greater incompatibility could there be than between myself and someone with a nostalgia for nothingness? Not that she was without her reasons (my weakness for her was such that I struggled to understand them): it was true that there was an absoluteness about the void, a rigour, a presence such as to make everything that claimed to have the requisites for existence seem approximate, limited, shaky; if one starts to draw comparisons between what is and what is not, it is the poorer qualities of the former that strike you, the impurities, the flaws; in short, you can only really feel safe with nothingness. That said, how should I react? Turn my back on the whole, plunge into the void again? It was hardly possible! Once set in motion, the process by which non-being was becoming being couldn’t be stopped: the void belonged to a past that was irremediably over now.

One of the many advantages of being was that it allowed us, from the climax of our achieved fullness, to indulge in a moment’s regret for the nothingness we had lost, a moment’s melancholy contemplation of the negative fullness of the void. In that sense I could go along with Nugkta’s inclinations, indeed no one would be more capable than myself of expressing this feeling of yearning with conviction. No sooner thought than done: I rushed towards Nugkta crying: ‘Oh, if only we could lose ourselves in the boundless spaces of the void …’ (That is, I did something somehow equivalent to crying something of the like.) And how did she react? By turning away in disgust. It took me a while to realize how crude I had been and to learn that one speaks of the void (or better still doesn’t speak) with a great deal more discretion.

From then on it was one long series of crises which kept me in a state of constant agitation. How could I have been so mistaken as to seek the completeness of fullness in preference to the perfection of the void? True, the passage from non-being to being had been a considerable novelty, a sensational development, a discovery guaranteed to impress. But one could hardly claim that things had changed for the better. From a state of clarity, faultless, without stain, one had gone to a bungled, cluttered construction crumbling away on every side, held together by pure luck. How could I have been so excited by the so-called marvels of the universe? The scarcity of available materials had in many cases led to monotonous repetitive states, or again in many others to a scatter of untidy, inconsistent improvisations few of which would lead to anything at all. Perhaps it had been a false start: the veneer of what tried to pass itself off as a universe would soon fall away like a mask, and nothingness, the only true completeness possible, would once again impose its invincible absolute.

So began a time when it was only in the chinks of emptiness, the absences, the silences, the gaps, the missing connections, the flaws in time’s fabric, that I could find meaning and value. Through those chinks I would sneak glances at the great realm of non-being, recognizing it now as my only true home, a home I regretted having betrayed in a temporary clouding of consciousness, a home Nugkta had brought me to rediscover. Yes, to rediscover: for together with her, my inspiration, I would slither into these narrow passages of nothingness that crossed the compactness of the universe; together we would achieve the obliteration of every dimension, of all time, all substance, all form.

By now the understanding between myself and Nugkta should at last have been clear. What could come between us? Yet every now and then unexpected differences would emerge: it seemed I had become more severe with the world of existence than she; I was amazed to discover in her an attitude of indulgence, complicity I might almost say, with the efforts that dusty vortex was making to keep itself together. (Already there were well-formed electromagnetic fields, nuclei, the first atoms.)

Here it must be said that so long as one considered the universe as the complete expression of total fullness, it could inspire nothing but banality and rhetoric, but if one thought of it as something made from very little, a poor thing scratched together on the edge of nothingness, it excited sympathy and encouragement, or at least a benevolent curiosity as to whatever might come of it. To my surprise I found Nugkta willing to support it, to assist it, this mean, poverty-stricken, sickly universe. Whereas I was tough: ‘Give me the void! All glory and honour to nothingness!’ I insisted, concerned that this weakness of Nugkta’s might distract us from our goal. And how did Nugkta reply? With her usual mocking snorts, exactly as she had at the time of my excessive enthusiasm for the glories of the universe.

Slow as I am, only later would I come to appreciate that once again she was right. The only contact we could have with the void was through this little the void had produced as quintessence of its own emptiness; the only image we had of the void was our own poor universe. All the void we would ever know was there, in the relativity of what is, for even the void had been no more than a relative void, a void secretly shot through with veins and temptations to be something, given that in a moment of crisis at its own nothingness it had been able to give rise to the universe.

Today, after time has churned its way through billions of minutes, billions of years, and the universe is unrecognizable from what it was in those first instants, since space suddenly became transparent so that the galaxies wrap the night in their blazing spirals, and along the orbits of the solar systems millions of worlds bring forth their Himalayas and their oceans according to the cosmic seasons, and the continents throng with masses whether jubilant or suffering or slaughtering each other, turn and turn about with meticulous obstinacy, and empires rise and fall in their marble, porphyry and concrete capitals, and the markets overflow with quartered cattle and frozen peas and displays of brocade and tulle and nylon, and transistors and computers and every kind of gadget pulsate, and everybody in every galaxy is busy observing and measuring everything, from the infinitely small to the infinitely large, there’s a secret that only Nugkta and I know: that everything space and time contains is no more than that little that was generated from nothingness, the little that is and that might very well not be, or be even smaller, even more meagre and perishable. And if we prefer not to speak of it, whether for good or for ill, it is because the only thing we could say is this: poor, frail universe, born of nothing, all we are and do resembles you.





Implosion




‘Over the last few years, quasars, Seyfert galaxies, BL Lacertae objects, or, more generally, active galactic nuclei, have been attracting the attention of astronomers because of the huge quantities of energy these bodies emit, at velocities of up to 10,000 kilometres per second. There are good reasons for supposing that the central driving force of the galaxy is a black hole of enormous mass’ (L’ Astronomia, no. 36). ‘Active galactic nuclei may be fragments left unexploded by the Big Bang and engaged in a process exactly opposite to that which takes place in black holes, a process, that is, of explosive expansion involving the liberation of enormous quantities of energy (‘white holes’). They could be explained as the exit extremities of a connecting link between two points in space-time (Einstein-Rosen’s bridges), expelling material devoured by a black hole situated at the entrance extremity. According to this theory, a Seyfert galaxy a hundred million light years away may now be expelling gas sucked in by another part of the universe ten billion years ago. And it is even possible that a quasar ten billion light-years away may have assumed the form we see today by taking in material that reaches it from some point in the future, travelling through a black hole which, as far as we are concerned, formed only today’ (Paolo Maffei, Monsters of the Sky, pp. 210–15).

To explode or to implode – said Qfwfq – that is the question: whether ’tis nobler in the mind to expand one’s energies in space without restraint, or to crush them into a dense inner concentration and, by ingesting, cherish them. To steal away, to vanish; no more; to hold within oneself every gleam, every ray, deny oneself every vent, suffocating in the depths of the soul the conflicts that so idly trouble it, give them their quietus; to hide oneself, to obliterate oneself: perchance to reawaken elsewhere, changed.

Changed … In what way changed? And the question, to explode or to implode: would one have to face it again? Absorbed by the vortex of this galaxy, does one pop up again in other times and other firmaments? Here sink away in cold silence, there express oneself in fiery shrieks of another tongue? Here soak up good and evil like a sponge in the shadow, there gush forth like a dazzling jet, to spray and spend and lose oneself. To what end then would the cycle repeat itself? I really don’t know, I don’t want to know, I don’t want to think about it: here, now, my choice is made: I shall implode, as if this centripetal plunge might for ever save me from doubt and error, from the time of ephemeral change, from the slippery descent of before and after, bring me to a time of stability, still and smooth, enable me to achieve the one condition that is homogeneous and compact and definitive. You explode, if that’s more to your taste, shoot yourselves all around in endless darts, be prodigal, spendthrift, reckless: I shall implode, collapse inside the abyss of myself, towards my buried centre, infinitely.

How long has it been since none of you has been able to imagine the life force except in terms of explosion? You have your reasons, I know. Your model is that of a universe born from a madcap explosion whose first splinters still hurtle unchecked and incandescent at the edge of space; your emblem is the exuberant kindling of supernovae flaunting the insolent youth of stars overloaded with energy; your favourite metaphor is the volcano, to show that even a mature and settled planet is always ready to break its bonds and burst forth. And the furnaces that flare in the furthest bounds of the heavens confirm your cult of universal conflagration; gases and particles almost as swift as light hurl themselves from vortex to centre of spiral galaxies, burst out into the lobes of elliptic galaxies, proclaim that the Big Bang still lives, the great Pan is not dead. No, I’m not deaf to your reasons; I could even join you. Go on! Explode! Burst! Let the new world begin again, repeat its ever renewed beginnings in a thunder of cannonfire, as in Napoleon’s times … Wasn’t it that age, by the way, with its elation at the revolutionary might of artillery fire that made us think of the explosion not just as harmful to people and property, but as a sign of birth, of genesis? Isn’t it since then that passions, poetry and the ego have been seen as perpetual explosions? But if that’s true, then so is its opposite; ever since that August when the mushroom rose over cities reduced to a layer of ash, an age was born in which the explosion is symbolic only of absolute negation. But that was something we already knew anyway, from the moment when, rising above the calendar of terrestrial chronicle, we enquired of the destiny of the universe, and the oracles of thermodynamics answered us: every existing form will break up in a blaze of heat; there is no entity can escape the irretrievable disorder of the corpuscles; time is a catastrophe, perpetual and irreversible.

Only a few old stars know how to get out of time; they are the open door to jump from a train headed for annihilation. At the limit of their decrepitude, shrunk to the size of Red Dwarfs or White Dwarfs, panting out the last glimmering gasp of the pulsar, compressed into neutron stars, here they are at last, light lost to the waste of the firmament, no more than the dark deletion of themselves, ready for the unstoppable collapse when everything, even light itself, falls inwards never to emerge again.

Praise be to the stars that implode. A new freedom opens up within them: annulled from space, exonerated from time, existing, at last, for themselves alone and no longer in relation to all the rest, perhaps only they can be sure they really exist. ‘Black holes’ is a derogatory nickname, dictated by envy: they are quite the opposite of holes, nothing could be fuller and heavier and denser and more compact, with a stubbornness to the way they sustain the gravity they bear within, as if clenching their fists, gritting their teeth, hunching their backs. Only on these terms can one save oneself from dissolving in overreaching extension, in Catherine wheels of effusion, exclamatory extroversion, effervescence and ebullition. Only in this way can one break through to a space-time where the implicit and the unexpressed don’t lose their energy, where the pregnancy of meanings is not diluted, where discretion and keeping distance multiply the effectiveness of every action.

Don’t distract yourselves fantasizing over the reckless behaviour of hypothetical quasi-stellar objects at the uncertain boundaries of the universe: it is here that you must turn your attention, to the centre of our galaxy, where all our calculations and instruments indicate the presence of a body of enormous mass that nevertheless remains invisible. Webs of radiation and gas, caught there perhaps since the time of the last implosions, show that there in the middle lies one of these so-called holes, spent as an old volcano. All that surrounds it, the wheel of planetary systems and constellations and the branches of the Milky Way, everything in our galaxy rests on the hub of this implosion sunk away into itself. That is my pole, my mirror, my secret home. It need fear no comparison with the furthest galaxies and their apparently explosive nuclei: there too what counts is what cannot be seen. Nothing comes out of there any more either, believe me: those impossibly fast flashes and whirls are just fuel to be crushed in the centripetal mortar, assimilated into the other mode of being, my own.

Sometimes, of course, I do seem to hear a voice from the furthest galaxies: ‘It’s me, Qfwfq, I am yourself exploding as you implode: I’m splashing out, expressing myself, spreading myself about, communicating, realizing all the potential I have; I really exist, not like you, introverted, reticent, egocentric, fused in an immutable self …’

Then I’m overwhelmed by the fear that even beyond the barrier of gravitational collapse time continues to flow: a different time, with no relation to the time left on this side, but speeding similarly headlong on a road with no return. In that case the implosion I’ve leaped into would be just a lull I’ve been granted, a respite before the fate I cannot escape.

Something like a dream, or a memory, goes through my mind: Qfwfq is fleeing the catastrophe of time, he finds an escape route through which to elude his destiny, he rushes through the gap, he is sure he has reached safety, from a chink in his refuge he watches how the events he has escaped gather pace, pities, from a distance, those who are overwhelmed, until, yes, he seems to recognize one of them, yes, it’s Qfwfq, it’s Qfwfq who beneath Qfwfq’s very eyes is experiencing that same catastrophe of before or after, Qfwfq who in the moment he perishes sees Qfwfq save himself, but without saving him. ‘Qfwfq, save yourself!’ cries Qfwfq, but is it the imploding Qfwfq who wants to save the exploding Qfwfq or vice versa? No Qfwfq can save any exploding Qfwfqs from the conflagration, as they in turn can’t pull back the other Qfwfqs from their unstoppable implosion. Any way time runs it leads to disaster whether in one direction or its opposite and the intersecting of those directions does not form a network of rails governed by points and exits, but a tangle, a knot …

I know I mustn’t listen to voices, nor give credit to visions or nightmares. I go on digging my hole, in my mole’s burrow.





A Rewritten Cosmicomic Story



The Other Eurydice




You have won, men of without, you have recast the stories to suit yourselves, to condemn us of within to the role you like to give us, the role of powers of darkness and of death, and the name you have given us, Hades, is laden with tones of doom. Truly, if all should forget what really happened between us, between Eurydice and Orpheus and myself, Pluto, a story quite the reverse of the one you tell, if no one at all now remembers that Eurydice was one of us and that she never did live on the surface of the Earth until Orpheus snatched her away from me with his deceitful music, then our ancient dream of making the Earth a living sphere will be lost for ever.

Even now hardly anyone still remembers what we meant by making the Earth live: not what you imagine, content with your dustcloud life set down on the border between water, earth and air. I wanted life to expand outwards from the centre of the Earth, to spread upwards through its concentric spheres, to circulate around its metals, liquid and solid. Such was Pluto’s dream. It was the only way the Earth might have become an enormous living organism, the only way we could have avoided that condition of precarious exile to which life has been forcibly reduced, the dull weight of an inanimate ball of stone beneath, and above, the void. You can no longer even imagine that life might have been something different from what now goes on without, or rather, almost without, since above you and the Earth’s crust, there is always the other tenuous crust of the air. Still, there’s no comparing this to the succession of spheres in whose interstices we creatures of the depths have always lived, and from which we still rise up to throng your dreams. The Earth is not solid inside, but disjointed, made up of superimposed layers of different densities one below the other, right down to the iron and nickel nucleus, which again is a system of nuclei one inside the other, each rotating separately from the others according to the greater or lesser liquidity of its element.

I don’t know what right you have to call yourself terrestrial creatures. Your true name would be extraterrestrials, people who live without: we who live within are the terrestrials, myself and Eurydice, for example, until the day you tricked her and took her away from me, to your desolate without.

This is the realm of Pluto, since it is here that I have always lived, together with Eurydice at first, then alone, in one of these lands within. A sky of stone wheeled above our heads, clearer than your sky and crossed, like yours, by clouds, gathering suspensions of chrome and magnesium. Winged shadows take flight: these skies within have their birds, concretions of light rock tracing out spirals that wind upwards and out of sight. The weather is subject to brusque changes: when showers of leaden rain beat down, or zinc crystals hail, there’s nothing for it but to worm your way into the shelter of some porous rock. Sometimes a fiery streak zigzags through the dark: it’s not lightning, but an incandescent metal snaking down through a vein.

We thought of the Earth as the internal sphere where we happened to be, the sky as the sphere that surrounded that sphere: the same way you do really, except that here these distinctions were always temporary, arbitrary, since the consistency of the elements was constantly changing, and sometimes we would realize that our sky was hard and solid, a millstone crushing us, while the earth was a sticky glue of whirling eddies and bubbling gases. I tried to take advantage of the downward melt of heavier elements to get closer to the true centre of the Earth, the nucleus of all nuclei, and I held Eurydice by the hand, leading her in the descent. But every downward infiltration that opened a way towards the centre would displace other material and force it back towards the surface: sometimes, as we sank down, we would be caught by the upward gushing tide and whirled along on the crest of its wave. So we went back up the terrestrial radius; passages would open in the mineral layers and suck us in and beneath us the rock would harden again. Until we found ourselves standing on another soil with another stony sky above our heads, hardly knowing if we were higher or lower than the point we had set out from.

No sooner did she see the metal of a new sky liquefy above us than Eurydice was seized by a yearning to fly. She flung herself upwards, swam across the dome of a first sky, then another, then a third, grabbing on to the stalactites that hung from the highest vaults. I followed, partly to join in her game and partly to remind her that we were supposed to be going in the opposite direction. Of course, Eurydice was as convinced as I was that the place we must get to was the centre of the Earth. Only by reaching the centre could we call the whole planet our own. We were the forefathers of terrestrial life and hence we had to begin to make the Earth live from its nucleus, gradually irradiating our condition throughout the globe. Terrestrial life was our goal, a life of the Earth and in the Earth; not what sprouts on the surface and which you think you can call terrestrial life, when it is no more than a mould that spreads its stains on the wrinkly peel of the apple.

We could already see the plutonic cities we meant to found rising under basalt skies, surrounded by walls of jasper – spherical, concentric cities sailing on oceans of mercury, washed by rivers of incandescent lava. What we wanted was a living-body-city-machine that would grow and grow until it filled the whole globe, a telluric machine that would use its boundless energy in ceaseless self-construction, combining and transforming all substances and shapes, performing, with the speed of a seismic shock, the work that you without have had to pay for with centuries of sweat. And this city-machine-living-body would be inhabited by beings like ourselves, giants stretching out their powerful arms across wheeling skies to embrace giantesses, who, with the rotating of concentric earths, would expose themselves in ever new attitudes giving rise to ever new couplings.

These minglings, these vibrations were to give birth to a realm of diversity and completeness, a realm of silence and of music. Constant vibrations, propagating themselves at varying slownesses, according to the depth and discontinuity of the materials, would ruffle the surface of our great silence, transforming it into the ceaseless music of the world, harmonizing the deep voices of the elements.

This to show you how mistaken your way is, your life where work and pleasure are at odds, where music and noise are two different things; this to show you how even then all this was clear, and the song of Orpheus none other than a sign of your partial and divided world. Why did Eurydice fall into the trap? She belonged entirely to our world, Eurydice, but her enchanted spirit was such that she delighted in every possible state of suspension, and as soon as she got the chance to launch herself in flight, in leaps, in ascents up volcanic vents, you would see her bending her body into twists and turns and curvets and capers.

Boundary zones, the passages that led from one terrestrial layer to another, gave her a keen sense of vertigo. I have said that the Earth is made up of roofs laid one above another, like the skins of an immense onion, and every roof leads to a higher roof, and all together look forward to the final roof, there where the Earth stops being Earth, where everything within is left on this side and on the other there is only what is without. You identify the Earth’s boundary with the Earth itself; you believe that the sphere is the surface that wraps around it, not the volume beneath; you have always lived in that flat dimension and you never even imagine that an elsewhere and an otherwise could exist; at the time we knew that this boundary was there, but we didn’t imagine one could see it, without leaving the Earth, an idea that wasn’t so much frightening as absurd. Everything the Earth expelled from its guts in eruptions and bituminous jets and fumaroles was sent flying out there: gases, liquid mixtures, volatile elements, worthless materials, refuse of every kind. The outside was the world’s negative, something we couldn’t even picture in our minds, the mere abstract idea of which was enough to provoke a shiver of disgust, no, of horror, or rather, a stupor, yes that’s it, a sense of vertigo (certainly our reactions were more complicated than you would imagine, especially Eurydice’s), into which would creep a certain fascination, an attraction to the void, the Janus-faced, the ultimate.

Following Eurydice on one of her wandering whims, I was led into the throat of a spent volcano. Above us, the other side of something like the narrow passage of an hourglass, the crusty grey cavity of the crater opened out into a landscape hardly different in shape and substance from those we lived in deep below; but what bewildered us was that the Earth ended here, it didn’t begin to weigh down on itself again in another form; from here on was emptiness, or at least a substance incomparably more tenuous than those we had so far encountered, a transparent, vibrant substance, the blue air.

It was these vibrations that lost Eurydice, vibrations so different from those that spread slowly through basalt and granite, different from all the cracks, clangs and dull boomings that shudder sluggishly through masses of fused metal or great walls of crystals. Here, minute pointed sound-sparks darted towards her one after another from every possible direction and at a speed that was unbearable to us: it was a sort of tickling that filled you with unseemly cravings. We were seized – or at least I was seized, since from here on I shall have to distinguish between my own state of mind and Eurydice’s – by the desire to retreat into that dark depth of silence over which the echo of earthquakes passes softly and is lost in the distance. But Eurydice, drawn as ever to the unusual and the rash, was eager to make this unique thing her own, regardless of whether it was good or bad.

It was then that the trap was sprung: beyond the edge of the crater the air vibrated continuously, or rather it vibrated continuously but in a way that involved different discontinuous vibrations. It was a sound that rose to fullness, faded, swelled again, and this modulation was part of an invisible pattern it followed, extended across time like a chequer of solids and spaces. Further vibrations were superimposed on these, and they were shrill and sharply separate, yet drew together in a halo, first sweet then bitter, and as they contrasted or followed the movement of the deeper sound, they imposed a sort of circle or field or dominion of sound.

My immediate instinct was to get out of that circle, to get back to padded density and I slipped inside the crater. But that same moment Eurydice had leaped up the rocks in the direction of the sound, and before I could stop her she was over the brim of the crater. Oh, it was an arm, something I thought might be an arm, that snatched her, snake-like, and dragged her out; I just heard a cry, her cry, join with the earlier sound, in harmony with it, in a single song that she and the unknown singer struck up together, to the rhythm of a stringed instrument, descending the outer slopes of the volcano.

I don’t know whether this image corresponds to something seen or something imagined: I was already sinking down into my darkness, the inner skies were closing one by one above me: the siliceous vaults, aluminium roofs, atmospheres of viscous sulphur; and the dappled subterranean silence echoed around me with its restrained rumblings, its muttered thunder. My relief at finding myself once again far away from the sickening edge of the air and the torment of those soundwaves was matched only by my desperation at having lost Eurydice. I was alone now: I hadn’t been able to save her from the torture of being torn from the Earth, exposed to the constant percussion of strings stretched in that air with which the world of the void defends itself from the void. My dream of making the Earth live by reaching the ultimate centre together with Eurydice had failed. Eurydice was a prisoner, exiled in the roofless wastes of the world without.

What followed was a time of waiting. My eyes studied the closely packed landscapes which, one above the other, fill the volume of the globe: threadlike caverns, chains of mountains stacked in scales and sheets, oceans wrung out like sponges; the more I acknowledged and was moved by our crammed, concentrated, compact world, the more I suffered that Eurydice was no longer there to live in it.

Freeing her became my sole obsession: forcing the gates of the world without, inside invading outside, reuniting Eurydice with terrestrial material, building a new vault above her, a new mineral sky, saving her from the hell of that vibrant air, of that sound, that song. I would watch the lava gather in volcanic caverns, the upward pressure on the vertical ducts of the Earth’s crust: that was the way.

Came the day of the eruption, a tower of lapilli rose black in the air above a decapitated Vesuvius, the lava poured through the vineyards of the bay, burst the gates of Herculaneum, crushed the mule-driver and his beast against a wall, snatched the miser from his money, the slave from his chopping block; a dog trapped in his collar pulled the chain from the ground and sought refuge in the barn. I was there in the midst: I pressed forward with the lava, the flaming avalanche broke up in tongues, rivers, snakes, and at the foremost tip I was there running forward to find Eurydice. I knew – something told me – that she was still a prisoner of the unknown singer: when I heard the music of that instrument and the timbre of that voice, I would have found her too.

I rushed on, transported by the lava flow through secluded gardens towards marble temples. I heard the song and a chord; two voices alternated; I recognized Eurydice’s – but how changed! – following the stranger’s. Greek characters on the undercurve of an arch spelt: Orpheos. I broke down the door, flooded over the threshold. For just an instant I saw her, next to the harp. The place was closed and vaulted, made specially, you would have thought, so that the music could gather there, as though in a shell. A heavy curtain, of leather I had the impression, or rather padded like a quilt, closed off a window, so as to isolate their music from the world around. As soon as I went in, Eurydice wrenched the curtain aside, throwing open the window; outside was the bay dazzling with reflected light and the city and the streets. The midday sun invaded the room, the sun and the sounds: a strumming of guitars rose from every side and the throbbing roar of scores of loudspeakers, together with the jagged backfiring of car engines and the honking of horns. The armour of noise stretched out across the Earth’s crust: the cortex which circumscribes your surface lives, with its antennas bristling on the roofs, turning to sound the waves that travel unseen and unheard through space, with its radios stuck to your ears, constantly filling them with the acoustic glue without which you don’t know whether you’re dead or alive, its jukeboxes with their store of incessantly revolving sounds and the never-ending siren of the ambulance picking up the wounded of your never-ending massacres.

The lava stopped against this wall of sound. Lacerated by the barbs of that fence of crashing vibrations, I made one more move forward to the point where for a moment I had seen Eurydice, but she was gone, and gone likewise her abductor: the song by which and on which they lived was submerged by the intruding avalanche of noise, and I could no longer distinguish either her or her song.

I withdrew, climbing reluctantly back along the lava flow, up the slopes of the volcano, I returned to live in silence, to bury myself.

Now, you who live without, tell me if by chance you happen to catch Eurydice’s song in that thick paste of sounds that surrounds you, the song that holds her prisoner and is in turn prisoner of the non-song that massacres all songs, and if you should recognize Eurydice’s voice with its distant echo of the silent music of the elements, tell me, give me news of her, you extraterrestrials, temporary victors, so that I can resume my plans to bring Eurydice to the centre of terrestrial life, to restore the realm of the gods of within, of the gods who inhabit the dense compactness of things, now that the gods of without, the gods of the Olympian heights and the rarefied air, have given you all they could give, and clearly it isn’t enough.




* * *



This was my first novel; I can almost say it was my first piece of writing, apart from a few stories. What impression does it make on me now, when I pick it up again? I read it not so much as something of mine but rather as a book born anonymously from the general atmosphere of a period, from a moral tension, a literary taste in which our generation recognized itself, at the end of World War II.

Italy's literary explosion in those years was less an artistic event than a physiological, existential, collective event. We had experienced the war, and we younger people—who had been barely old enough to join the partisans—did not feel crushed, defeated, "beat." On the contrary, we were victors, driven by the propulsive charge of the just-ended battle, the exclusive possessors of its heritage. Ours was not easy optimism, however, or gratuitous euphoria. Quite the opposite. What we felt we possessed was a sense of life as something that can begin again from scratch, a general concern with problems, even a capacity within us to survive torment and abandonment; but we added also an accent of bold gaiety. Many things grew out of that atmosphere, including the attitude of my first stories and my first novel.

This is what especially touches us today; the anonymous voice of that time, stronger than our still-uncertain individual inflections. Having emerged from an experience, a war and a civil war that had spared no one, made communication between the writer and his audience immediate. We were face to face, equals, filled with stories to tell; each had his own; each had lived an irregular, dramatic, adventurous life; we snatched the words from each other's



* * *



mouths. With our renewed freedom of speech, all at first felt a rage to narrate: in the trains that were beginning to run again, crammed with people and sacks of flour and drums of olive oil, every passenger told his vicissitudes to strangers, and so did every customer at the tables of the cheap restaurants, every woman waiting in line outside a shop. The grayness of daily life seemed to belong to other periods; we moved in a varicolored universe of stories.

So anyone who started writing then found himself handling the same material as the nameless oral narrator. The stories we had personally enacted or had witnessed mingled with those we had already heard as tales, with a voice, an accent, a mimed expression. During the partisan war, stories just experienced were transformed and transfigured into tales told around the fire at night; they had already gained a style, a language, a sense of bravado, a search for anguished or grim effects. Some of my stories, some pages of this novel originated in that new-born oral tradition, in those events, in that language.

But. . . but the secret of how one wrote then did not lie only in this elementary universality of content; that was not its mainspring (perhaps having begun this preface by recalling a collective mood has made me forget I am speaking of a book, something written down, lines of words on the white page). On the contrary, it had never been so clear that the stories were raw material : the explosive charge of freedom that animated the young writer was not so much his wish to document or to inform as it was his desire to express. Express what? Ourselves, the harsh flavor of life we had just learned, so many things we thought we knew or were, and perhaps really knew and were at that moment. Characters, landscapes, shooting, political slogans, jargon, curses, lyric flights, weapons, and love-making were



* * *



only colors on the palette, notes of the scale; we knew all too well that what counted was the music and not the libretto. Though we were supposed to be concerned with content, there were never more dogged formalists than we; and never were lyric poets as effusive as those objective reporters we were supposed to be.

For us who began there, "neorealism" was this; and of its virtues and defects this book is a representative catalogue, born as it was from that green desire to make literature, a desire characteristic of the "school." Some people today recall "neorealism" chiefly as a contamination or constraint suffered by literature for extraliterary reasons, but this view shifts the terms of the question. Actually the extraliterary elements stood there so massive and so indisputable that they seemed a fact of nature; to us the whole problem was one of poetics; how to transform into a literary work that world which for us was the world.

"Neorealism" was not a school. (We must try to state things precisely.) It was a collection of voices, largely marginal, a multiple discovery of the various Italys, even —or particularly—the Italys previously unknown to literature. Without the variety of Italys unknown (or presumedly unknown) to one another, without the variety of dialects and jargon that could be kneaded and molded into the literary language, there would have been no "neorealism." But it was not provincial, in the sense of the regional verismo of the nineteenth century. Local characterization was intended to give the flavor of truth to a depiction in which the whole wide world was to be recognized: like the rural America of those 1930s writers whose direct or indirect disciples so many critics accused us of being. Therefore language, style, pace had so much im-



* * *



portance for us, for this realism of ours which was to be as distant as possible from naturalism. We had drawn a line for ourselves, or rather a triangle—Verga, Vittorini, Pavese —from which to set out, each on the bases of his own local vocabulary and his own landscape. (I continue speaking in the plural, as if I were referring to an organized, conscious movement, now when I am explaining it was just the opposite. How easy it is, when you talk of literature, even in the midst of the most serious, factual discussion, to shift unaware to inventing stories. . . . For this reason discussions of literature irritate me more and more —the talk of others and my own as well.)

My landscape was something jealously mine (and this is where I could begin my preface: reducing to the minimum the "autobiography of a literary generation" lead, starting at once to speak of what concerns me directly, perhaps I can avoid being generic, approximate. . . .), a landscape that no one had ever really put on paper. (Except for the poet Montale—though he was from the other Ligur-ian Riviera—Montale, who I thought could be read as memory of our common landscape, in both his images and his vocabulary.) I came from the Riviera di Ponente; from the landscape of my city, San Remo, I polemically erased all the tourist shore—the sea front with its palm trees, casino, hotels, villas—as if I were ashamed of it. I began from the narrow alleys of the Old City, I climbed up the stream beds, I shunned the geometrical fields of carnations, I preferred the terraces of vineyards and olive groves with crumbling old dry walls, I ventured along the mule-tracks over the sedge-covered hills, up to where the woods begin, pines first, then chestnuts, and so I had gone from the sea—always visible from above, a stripe between two



* * *



green flanks—to the tortuous valleys of the Ligurian Pre-Alps.

I had a landscape. But if I was to depict it, it had to become secondary to something else: to people, to stories. The Resistance represented the fusion of landscape with people. The novel I would never have been able to write otherwise is here. The daily scene of my whole life had become entirely extraordinary and adventurous: a single story unwound from the dark arches of the Old City up to the woods. It was the pursuit and the concealment of armed men. I succeeded in depicting even the villas, now that I had seen them requisitioned and transformed into guardhouses and prisons; even the fields of carnations, since they had become a no man's land, dangerous to cross, evoking a rattle of automatic fire in the air. It was from this possibility of setting human stories in landscapes that "neorealism" . . .

In this novel (I had better pick up the thread again; it is too early to start writing an apology for "neorealism"; even today analyzing the reasons for our break with it is more consonant with our mood), the marks of the literary period mingle with those of the author's youth. The exacerbation of the themes of violence and sex in the end appears ingenuous (today the reader's palate is accustomed to swallowing far more scorching fare) and forced (the fact that for the author these themes were exterior and temporary is proved by his later work).

The determination to insert ideological argument into the story can seem just as ingenuous and forced, especially with a story like this, founded on quite a different basis: a tone of immediate, objective depiction, both in language



* * *



and in images. To satisfy the necessity of the ideological insertion, I used the expedient of concentrating all the theoretical reflections in a single chapter whose tone is detached from the others, Chapter Nine, the one containing reflections of Commissar Kim, almost like a preface set in the middle of the novel. This expedient was criticized by all my very first readers, who advised me to cut out the whole chapter. I realized that the book's homogeneity suffered (at that time stylistic unity was one of the few certain aesthetic criteria; the juxtapositions of different styles and languages that triumph today had not yet come back into fashion), but I held out: the book had been born like this, with this composite, illegitimate element.

The other big theme of future critical discussions, the language-dialect theme, is present here in its ingenuous phase: the dialect clotted into patches of color (whereas in the narratives I was to write later I tried to absorb it all into the language, like a vital but hidden plasma); uneven writing, which at times is almost precious and at other times flows as it comes, wholly given over to immediate depiction; a documentary-like repertory (sayings, songs) which almost arrives at folklore. . . . The problem of the tenses of the verbs: since the simple past tense does not exist in dialect, and to use the perfect would have been monotonous, I decided to write the whole novel in the present tense. . . .

And further (I continue the list of signs of age, my own and general; a preface written today makes sense only if it is critical), the way of describing the human character: exaggerated and grotesque features, twisted grimaces, obscure visceral-collective dramas. Italian literary and figurative culture had missed the appointment with expressionism in the post-World War I period, but it had its great



* * *



moment after World War II. Perhaps the right name for that Italian season, instead of "neorealism," should be "neo-expressionism."

The distortions of the expressionistic lens are reflected in this book on the faces that had belonged to my beloved companions. I took pains to disguise them, to make them unrecognizable, "negative," because I found a poetic meaning only in "negativity." And at the same time I felt remorse toward reality, so much more variegated and warm and undefinable, toward the real people who I knew were humanly far richer and better, a remorse I was to carry with me for years.. . .

This was my first novel. What effect does it have on me, when I reread it now? (Now I have found the point: this remorse. This is where I should begin the preface.) The uneasiness this book caused me for so long has, in part, been attenuated; in part, it remains. It is the relationship with something far larger than myself, with emotions that involved all my contemporaries, and tragedies, and acts of heroism, of generosity, of genius, and dark dramas of conscience. The Resistance: where does this book stand in the "literature of the Resistance"? At the time I wrote it, creating a "literature of the Resistance" seemed an imperative; barely two months after the Liberation, Vittorini's Uomini e no had appeared in the bookshops' windows, containing our primordial dialect of death and happiness. Milan's urban guerrillas had had their novel at once, all rapid sorties over the city's concentric map; we who had been mountain partisans wanted our own novel, with our own different pace and different movements. . . .

Not that I was so culturally ignorant that I did not know history's influence on literature is indirect, slow,



* * *



often contradictory. I knew well that many great historical events had occurred without inspiring a great novel, even during the "century of the novel" par excellence. I knew the great novel of the Risorgimento had never been written. We all knew, we were not that ingenuous; but I believe that whenever one has witnessed or participated in a historic period, he feels a special responsibility. . . .

In my case, this responsibility made me feel, finally, that the theme was too important and solemn for my powers. And then, to avoid being intimidated by the theme, I decide to tackle it not head-on but obliquely. Everything would be seen through the eyes of a child, in an atmosphere of urchins and tramps. I invented a story that would remain at the edge of the partisan war, its heroism and sacrifices, but at the same time would convey its color, its harsh flavor, its pace. . . .

This was my first novel. How can I define it now, reexamine it after so many years? (I must begin all over again. I had set off in the wrong direction: I was about to end up showing that this novel sprang from a clever evasion of "engagement," whereas on the contrary . . .) I can define it as an example of "engaged" literature in the most rich and full meaning of the word. Today, generally, when "engaged literature" is discussed, an erroneous idea is created, as if it were a literature employed to illustrate an already determined thesis, independently of any poetic expression. Instead, what was called "engagement," that kind of commitment, can crop up at every level; here it means, first of all, image and word, attitude, pace, style, contempt, defiance.

In the choice of the theme itself there is already an ostentation of almost provocatory boldness. Toward whom?



* * *



I would say I wanted to fight simultaneously on two fronts, challenging the Resistance's detractors and, at the same time, those high priests of a hagiographic and edulcorated Resistance.

First front : hardly more than a year after the Liberation, "right-minded respectability" was already on the upsurge again, exploiting every contingent aspect of that time —the confusion of postwar youth, the recrudescence of crime, the difficulty of establishing a new legality—to exclaim: "There, we said so all along; these Partisans, they're all like that; they needn't come telling us tales of the Resistance; we know perfectly well the sort of ideals. . . ."

This was the climate in which I wrote my book, which was meant to answer those right-minded, paradoxically: "Very well, I'll act as if you were right. I won't portray the finest partisans, but the worst ones possible. I'll focus my novel on a unit made up entirely of pretty devious characters. What does that change? Even those who flung themselves into the fight without any clear motivation were driven by an elementary impulse of human rescue, an impulse that made them a hundred thousand times better than you, that made them active forces of history such as you could never dream of being!" The sense of this argument, of this defiance is remote now; and even then, I must say, the book was read simply as a novel, not as an element in the discussion of a historic judgment. All the same, if you still feel a certain tingle of provocation, it comes from the controversy of that time.

From the double controversy. Even if the battle on the second front, the one inside "left-wing culture," also seems remote now. The attempt at "political direction" of literary activity was just beginning. The writer was being asked to create a "positive hero," to provide norma-



* * *



tive images, pedagogical standards of social behavior, of revolutionary militancy. This, as I said, was just beginning; and I must add that, then and later, such pressures did not have much effect or much support here in Italy. Nevertheless, the danger of the new literature's being assigned a celebratory, didactic function was in the air. When I wrote this book I had barely sensed it, but my hackles had already risen, my claws were bared against the menace of a new bombast. (We maintained our anticon-formity intact then: an endowment difficult to preserve. But though it has known some occasional, partial eclipses, it still sustains us in this far more facile but no less dangerous period....)

My reaction at that time could be expressed thus: "Ah, so you want the 'socialist hero,' eh? You want 'revolutionary romanticism,' do you? Well, I'll write you a partisan story in which nobody is a hero, nobody has any class consciousness. I'll give you the world of the lingere, the tramps, the Lumpenproletariat! [A new concept for me then; and it seemed a big discovery. I did not know that it had been and would continue to be the easiest terrain for fiction.] And this will be the most positive, the most revolutionary of works! What do we care about men who are heroic already, already socially conscious? It is the process toward those things that must be described! As long as there is one individual who has not gained that awareness, our duty is to concern ourselves with him, and only with him!"

This was how I reasoned, and with this polemical rage I flung myself into writing and I distorted the features and the character of people who had been my dearest companions, with whom for months and months I had shared a mess tin of chestnuts and the risk of death, for



* * *



whose fate I had feared, whose nonchalance I had admired as they burned their bridges behind them, as I had admired their way of life free of egoisms; and I made them masks, contracted by constant grimaces, grotesque figures. I created dense chiaroscuro clouds—or what in my youthful naivete I imagined might be chiaroscuro clouds— around their stories. . . . Only to feel afterward a remorse that was to dog me for years. . . .

I still have to start this preface once more, from the beginning. I have not yet got it right. From what I have said, it would seem that, writing this book, I had the whole thing quite clear in my mind: the reasons, arguments, the adversaries to combat, the poetic to sustain. . . . Instead, if all this was there, it was still in a confused, shapeless stage. Actually the book came forth as if by chance; I started writing without a precise plot in mind. I set out from that urchin character, from an element of direct observation of reality, a way of moving, of speaking, of establishing a rapport with grownups. To give this a fictional base, I invented the story of the sister, the pistol stolen from the Germans. Then the arrival among the partisans proved a difficult development; the leap from picaresque tale to collective epic threatened to spoil everything. I had to have an invention that would allow me to maintain the whole story on the same level, and I invented the detachment of Dritto.

As always, it was the story itself that imposed almost obligatory solutions. But in this plan, this pattern being formed as if on its own, I decanted my own still-fresh experience, a host of voices and faces (I distorted the faces, I tortured the people as any writer always does, so that reality became clay, instrument; and the writer knows this



* * *



is the only way he can write, though he feels remorse all the same. . . .), a flood of arguments and reading interwoven with that experience.

Reading and experience of life are not two universes, but one. Every experience of life, in order to be interpreted, calls on certain readings and is fused with them. The fact that books are always born from other books is a truth, only apparently in contradiction with that other truth: that books are born from practical life and from relationships with human beings. We had just ended our partisan activity when we discovered (first in fragments published in magazines, then the whole book) a novel about the war in Spain that Hemingway had written six or seven years before: For Whom the Bell Tolls. It was the first book in which we recognized ourselves. This was where we began transforming into narratives themes and sentences that we had seen, felt, lived. The unit of Pablo and Pilar was our unit. (Today that is perhaps the book of Hemingway's I like least; in fact, even then it was the discovery of other books of his—especially the first stories —with the true lesson of his style, that made Hemingway our author.)

The literature we were interested in carried this sense of teeming humanity and mercilessness and nature. The Russians too, at the time of the Civil War—before Soviet literature became so Victorian and oleographic—we felt as our contemporaries, especially Babel, whose Red Cavalry we knew in an Italian translation even before the war, one of the exemplary books of our century's realism, born from the relationship between the intellectual and revolutionary violence.

This literature lies behind Il sentiero dei nidi di ragno. But in one's youth, every new book read is like a



* * *



new eye opened, changing the sight of the other eyes or book-eyes one had before. And in the new idea of literature I was longing to create, all the literary universes that had enchanted me from childhood on lived again. . . . So, in setting myself to write something like Hemingway's For Whom the Bell Tolls, I also wanted to write something like Stevenson's Treasure Island.

Cesare Pavese caught on immediately, and from Il sentiero he guessed all my literary favorites. Pavese was the first to speak of a fairy-tale quality in my writing; and I, who had not realized it till then, was all too aware of it afterward, and attempted to confirm his definition. My story was beginning to be written down, and now it seems to me all contained in that beginning.

Perhaps, finally, your first book is the only one that matters. Perhaps a writer should write only that one. That is the one moment when you make the big leap; the opportunity to express yourself is offered that once, and you untie the knot within you then or never again. Perhaps poetry is possible only in one moment of a life, and for most people that moment is early youth. When it has passed, whether or not you have expressed yourself (and you will know only a hundred or a hundred and fifty years later; contemporaries cannot be good judges), after that the cards are on the table, you will come back only to imitate others or yourself, you will no longer succeed in saying a word that is true, irreplaceable. . . .

Interruption. Any discussion based on purely literary reasoning, if it is honest, ends in this blind alley, in this failure that writing always is. Luckily writing is not only a literary act; it is also something else. Once again, I feel obliged to correct the course this preface has taken.



* * *



This else, in my concerns of that time, was a definition of what partisan warfare had been. A friend and contemporary of mine, a doctor now, but then a student like me, spent whole evenings with me, arguing. For both of us the Resistance had been the fundamental experience : for him in a much more committed fashion, because he had been called on to assume grave responsibilities, and at just over twenty he had been Commissar of a partisan division, the one in which I had also taken part as a simple Garibaldino. It seemed to us then, a few months after the Liberation, that everyone was talking about the Resistance in the wrong way, a bombast was growing up, hiding its true essence, its basic character. It would be hard for me now to reconstruct our discussions; I remember only our constant argument against all mythicized images, our reduction of the partisan consciousness to a basic element that we had found in the simplest of our companions. It became the key to present and future history.

My friend was a cold, analytical debater, sarcastic toward everything that was not a fact. This book's only intellectual character, Commissar Kim, was meant to be a portrait of him; and something of our discussions of those days, our debate as to why those men without uniform or flag had fought, must have remained in my pages, in the dialogues between Kim and the brigade commander and in Kim's soliloquies.

These discussions were the background of the book, and, even before them, all my private reflections on violence, ever since I had found myself taking up arms. Before going off with the partisans, I had been a young bourgeois, who had always lived at home. My calm anti-Fascism was, most of all, opposition to the cult of warrior



* * *



force; it was a matter of style, or sense of humor. Then suddenly coherence with my opinions led me into partisan violence, to measure myself by that other yardstick. It was a trauma, my first. . . .

And at the same time, there were reflections on moral judgment of people and on the historical meaning of the actions of each of us. For many of my contemporaries chance alone had determined the side for which they were to fight. Often roles were abruptly reversed: a die-hard Fascist became a partisan, or vice versa. Whatever side they were on, they shot and were shot at; only death gave their choice an irrevocable mark. (It was Pavese who could write: "Every victim resembles every survivor and asks him why," on the final page of La casa in collina, as he was trapped between his remorse at not having fought and his effort to be sincere about the reasons for his refusal.)

There: I have found how to lay out the preface. For months, after the end of the war, I tried to narrate the partisan experience in the first person, or with a protagonist who resembled me. I wrote some stories which were published; others I threw in the wastebasket. I moved awkwardly. I could never completely stifle the sentimental and moralistic vibrations. There was always a false note somewhere. To me, my personal history seemed humble, mean; I was full of complexes, inhibitions in the face of everything that meant the most to me.

As soon as I started writing stories in which I did not appear, all went smoothly: the language, rhythm, shape were precise, functional. The more I made the story objective, anonymous, the more it pleased me, and not only me. When I showed those stories to other members of the profession, people I had come to know in those



* * *



early postwar days—Vittorini in Milan, Natalia Ginzburg and Pavese in Turin—they no longer voiced any objections. I began to realize that the more anonymous and objective the story was, the more it was mine.

Then the gift of "objective" writing seemed to me the most natural thing in the world; I could never have imagined I was to lose it so quickly. Every story moved with perfect confidence in a world I knew so well : this was my experience, my experience multiplied by the experience of the others. And historic significance, morality, sentiment were present precisely because I kept them hidden, implicit.

When I began planning a story about the character of a boy partisan I had known in our group, I did not think it would be longer than the others. Why did it turn into a novel? Because—I realized later—the identification between me and the protagonist had become something more complex. The relationship between the character of the boy Pin and the partisan war corresponded symbolically to the relationship with that war that I myself had come to have. Pin's inferiority, as a child in the face of the grownups' incomprehensible world, corresponds to my own, in the same situation, as a bourgeois. And Pin's audacity, due to his boasted underworld origins which make him feel the accomplice and virtually the superior of any "outlaw," corresponds to the "intellectual" way of mastering the situation, never being amazed, defending oneself from emotion. And so, thanks to these transpositions (which, mind you, I realized only a posteriori, a later help to explain to myself what I had written), the story from which my personal viewpoint had been banned became once again my story. . . .



* * *



My story was the story of an adolescence that lasted too long, for the young man who had used the war as an alibi, in both the original and figurative meaning of the word. In the space of a few years, the alibi had become a here and now. Too soon for me, or too late: dreams dreamed too long, and I was unprepared for living them. First, the reversal of the alien war, the transformation into heroes and chiefs of yesterday's obscure rebels. Now, in peacetime, the fervor of new energies that animated all relationships, invaded all instruments of public life, and suddenly also the remote castle of literature opened like a nearby, friendly refuge, ready to welcome the provincial youth with fanfares and banners. And an amorous charge electrified the air, brightened the eyes of the girls that war and peace had restored to us and made closer, now truly coeval, companions, in an understanding that was the new gift of those first months of peace, filling the warm evenings of resuscitated Italy with dialogue and laughter.

Among all these beckoning possibilities, I was unable to be what I had dreamed before the hour of the test: I had been the last of the partisans; I was an uncertain and unsatisfied and unskilled lover; literature did not offer itself as a casual, detached skill but was more like a road on which I was unable to start out. Filled with youthful desire and tension, I was denied the spontaneous grace of youth. The sudden ripening of the times only accentuated my own unripeness.

So the symbolic protagonist of my book was an image of regression: a child. To Pin's childish, jealous gaze, weapons and women were again distant and incomprehensible. What my philosophy exalted, my poetics transfigured in enemy apparitions, my excess of love dyed with infernal desperation.



* * *



As I wrote, my stylistic requirement was to remain below events. The Italian speech I liked was that of someone who "doesn't speak Italian at home." I tried to write as a hypothetical, autodidact me would have written.

Il sentiero dei nidi di ragno was born from this sense of absolute lack of property, half suffered to the point of torment, half imagined and vaunted. If I find any value in the book today it lies there: in the image of a still-obscure vital power where the indigence of the "too young" man is soldered with the indigence of the outcast and the rejected.

When I say that we then made literature out of our condition of poverty, I am not speaking so much of an ideological program as of something deeper in each of us.

Nowadays, when writing is a regular profession, when the novel is a "product" with its "market," its "demand" and its "supply," with its advertising campaigns, its successes, and its routine, now that Italian novels are all "of a good average level" and are among the superfluous goods of a too quickly satisfied society, it is hard to recall the spirit in which we tried to initiate a kind of fiction that still had to be built entirely with our own hands.

I continue to use the plural, but I have already explained that I am speaking of something dispersed, not agreed upon, something that emerged from the scattered corners of the provinces, without explicit common reasons, unless they were partial and temporary. More than anything else it was, you could say, a widespread potential, something in the air. And soon extinct.

By the 1950s the picture had changed, starting with the masters: Pavese dead, Vittorini sealed off in a silence of opposition, Alberto Moravia in a different context, tak-



* * *



ing on a different meaning (no longer existential but naturalistic); and the Italian novel assumed its elegiac-moderate sociological course. We all finally dug ourselves niches, more or less comfortable (or found our own avenues of escape).

But there were some who continued along the path of that first, fragmentary epic. For the most part, they were the more isolated, the outsiders, who retained that strength. And it was the most solitary of all who succeeded in creating the novel we had all dreamed of, when none of us expected it any longer. Beppe Fenoglio succeeded in writing it, in Il partigiano Johnny, but not in finishing it. He died before it was published, in his forties.

This was my first novel, almost my first piece of writing. What can I say about it today? I will say this: it would always be better not to have written one's first book.

As long as your first book remains unwritten, you possess that freedom which you can use only once in a lifetime. Your first book already defines you, while you are really far from being defined. And this definition is something you may then carry with you for the rest of your life, trying to confirm it or extend or correct or deny it; but you can never eliminate it.

Moreover: for those who began writing young, after one of those experiences with "so many things to say" (the war, in this case and in many others), the first book immediately becomes a partition between you and experience; it severs the ties that bind you to events; it burns up the treasure of memory—what would have become a treasure if you had had the patience to preserve it, if you had not been in such a hurry to spend it, to squander it, to impose an arbitrary hierarchy on the images you had



* * *



stored up, separating the favorites, the presumed containers of poetic emotion, from those others that seemed to concern you too much or too little for you to be able to portray them—setting up, in other words, arrogantly, another transfigured memory in the place of the general memory with its vague outlines, its infinite possibilities of rediscovery. . . . Your memory will never recover from this violence you have done it in writing: the favored images will be consumed by their premature promotion to literary themes, while the images you wanted to keep in reserve, perhaps with the secret intention of using them in future works, will wither, because they are cut off from the natural wholeness of vital, flowing memory. The literary projection, where all is solid and fixed for good, has now occupied the field, has faded and crushed the vegetation of memories where the life of the tree and that of the blade of grass are reciprocally conditioned. Memory—or rather experience, which is memory plus the wound it has left in you, plus the change it has worked in you that has made you different—experience, first nourishment also of literary work (but not only of that), true wealth for the writer (but not only for him), now, as soon as it has given shape to a literary work, declines, is destroyed. The writer finds himself once again the poorest of men.

And so I look back, to that season which appeared to me crammed with images and meanings: the partisan war, the months that were worth years and from which for a lifetime one should have been able to extract faces and warnings and landscapes and thoughts and episodes and words and emotions. And everything is distant and misty, and the written pages are there, in their shameless confidence which I well know is fraudulent, the written pages already arguing against a moment that was still a



* * *



present, massive fact, which seemed stable, given, once and for all, experience—and they are no use to me. I would need all the rest, the very things that are not there. A written booh will never console me for what I destroyed in writing if. that experience which, if cherished through the years of a lifetime, would perhaps have served me to write the last book, though it sufficed only for me to write the first.

June 1964

Italo Calvino

Translated from the Italian by William Weaver



* * *



CHAPTER ONE

The old towns on the Ligurian coast grew up in times when those parts were infested by Moorish pirates; built to resist siege, they are as close and dense as pine-cones; their deep narrow alleys, called carrugi, are spanned by arches propping the tops of the houses, with dark vaulted arcades and flights of cobbled steps running far below.

Life in one of these old towns, towards the end of 1944, seems back in the times of the Moorish sieges; after curfew only armed patrols circulate in the alleys; a feeble light flickers from the street lanterns; the walls are stacked with sandbags; and when ships appear out at sea the population coops itself up underground.

To reach the depths of the alleys the sun's rays must go straight down, grazing the cold walls and falling over windows scattered haphazard here and there, over tufts of basil and marjoram planted in cooking pots on the sills, and underclothes hung out to dry.

In Long Alley, the carrugio with the worst reputation in the town, the first to put his nose out is Pin, the cobbler's apprentice. He calls, begins a song, and a chorus of shouts and insults pours from every window. The alley begins another day.

"Pin! At it already, making our lives a misery! Sing us one of your songs, Pin! Pin, you little wretch, what's he doing to you? Pin, you little monkey-face! If only your throat would dry in your guts! You and that chicken-thief of a master of yours! You and that mattress of a sister of yours!"

But by now Pin is standing in the middle of the alley, with his hands in the pockets of a jacket that's too big for him, looking up at them one by one with an unsmiling face: "Hey, Celestino, you'd better keep quiet, you with that fine



* * *



new suit of yours. They haven't found out yet who stole that stuff from the quays, have they? Hallo, Carolina, you were lucky that time. Yes. Lucky your hushand didn't look under the bed that time."

Pin has the hoarse voice of a much older boy; he shouts out his jeers in deep, serious tones, then suddenly breaks into a laugh with a note as high and sharp as a whistle, while red and black freckles cluster up round his eyes like a swarm of wasps.

Insulting Pin is always risky; he knows all the inside gossip of the alley and one can never tell what he'll come out with. From morning till night he's out there under the windows singing and shouting at the top of his voice, while in Pietro-magro's shop the pile of unmended shoes almost buries the cobbler's bench and spills out into the street.

"Pin, you little monkey! You little horror!" a woman shouts at him. "Resole those slippers for me instead of standing there making a nuisance of yourself all day! They've been in that pile a month. I'll have something to say to your master when they let him out!"

Pietromagro spends half his life in prison, for he was born without luck, and whenever there's a theft in the neighbourhood he's always the one to be eventually put inside. He gets out to find that great pile of unmended shoes in an empty shop. Then he sits down at his cobbler's bench, takes up a shoe, turns it over once or twice, throws it back into the heap, and finally puts his hairy face into his bony hands and begins swearing. When Pin, knowing nothing, comes in whistling, he is suddenly faced by Pietromagro, with a face covered in short black hair like dog's fur, eyes ringed with yellow round the pupils, and hand upraised. Pin screams, but Pietromagro has already caught him and does not let go. When Pietromagro is tired of hitting Pin he leaves him in the shop and makes for the tavern. No one sees any more of him that day.

On alternate evenings Pin's sister is visited by a German



* * *



sailor. Every time the man makes his way up the alley, Pin waits for him to ask for a cigarette. The sailor was generous at first and even gave him three or four at a time. It's easy for Pin to make fun of the German, who can't understand what he says and looks at him from a shapeless congealed-looking face, shaven to the temples. Then, when the sailor's back is turned, Pin can shout insults after him, certain he won't turn round. Seen from behind the sailor looks ridiculous, with those two black ribbons hanging down from his little cap over his short tunic to his bare-looking bottom; a fleshy bottom, like a woman's, with a big German pistol dangling over it.

"Little pimp . . . little pimp . . ." people call down from the windows at Pin, not too loudly though, as one never knows with those Germans.

"Cuckolds . . . cuckolds . . ." Pin shouts back, copying their voices, and gulping down cigarette smoke that feels sharp and rough against his tender throat, but which has to be gulped down, who knows why, till his eyes water and he breaks into a violent fit of coughing. Then, with the cigarette still in his mouth, off he goes to the tavern and calls out: "By God, I'll tell anyone who stands me a glass of wine something he'd like to hear."

In the tavern are the same men who have been there all day long for years, sitting with their elbows on the tables and their chins in their fists, gazing at the flies on the sticky paper and the purple stains in the bottom of their glasses.

"What's up?" says Michel the Frenchy. "Has your sister reduced her prices?"

The others laugh and pound their fists on the zinc table-tops: "You've had the reply you deserve this time, Pin!"

Pin stands there looking them up and down through the spiky fringe of hair covering his forehead.

"God, just as I thought. Look at him, he thinks of nothing but my sister. Never stops thinking of her, I tell you. He's in love. In love with my sister, God help him. . . ."



* * *



The others roar with laughter and clap him on the back and pour him out a glass. Pin does not like wine; it feels harsh against his throat and wrinkles his skin up and makes him long to laugh and shout and stir up trouble. Yet he drinks it, swallowing down each glassful in one gulp, as he swallows cigarette smoke, or as at night he watches with shivers of disgust his sister lying with some man on her bed, a sight like the feel of a rough hand moving over his skin, harsh like all sensations men enjoy; smoke, wine, women.

"Sing, Pin," they say. And Pin begins singing, seriously, tensely, in that hoarse childish voice of his. He sings a song called "The Four Seasons":

When I think of the future

And the liberty I've lost

I'd like to kiss her and then die

While she sleeps . . . and never knows.

The men sit listening in silence, with their eyes lowered, as if to a hymn. All of them have been to prison; no-one is a real man to them unless he has. And the old jail-birds' song is full of the melancholy which seeps into the bones in prison, at night, when the warders pass hitting the grills with a crowbar, and gradually the quarrels and curses die down, and all that can still be heard is a voice singing this song which Pin is singing now, and which no one shouts for him to stop.

At night I love to hear

The sentry's call,

I love to watch the passing moon

Light up my cell.

Pin has never been in a real prison yet; once when they tried to take him off to a reformatory he escaped. Every now and again he is picked up by the municipal guards for some escapade among the stalls in the fruit-market, but he always sends the guards nearly crazy with his screams and sobs, until



* * *



finally they let him go. He has been shut up in their guardroom once or twice, though, and knows what prison feels like; that's why he is singing this song so well, with real emotion.

Pin knows a lot of old songs which have been taught him by the men of the tavern, songs about violence and bloodshed such as "Torna Caserio" or the one about a soldier called Pep-pino who killed his lieutenant. Then, when they are all feeling sad and gazing into the purple depths of their glasses, Pin suddenly twirls round the smoky room and begins singing at the top of his voice:

And I touched her hair — And she said not there . . .

Then the men begin pounding on the tables and shouting "hiuu," and clapping time, while the servant-girl tries to save the glasses. And the women in the tavern, old drunks with red faces like the one called the Bersagliera, sway to and fro as if to the rhythm of a dance. And Pin, the blood running in his head and gritting his teeth with the effort, seems to be throwing his very soul into the song as he shouts at the top of his voice:

And I touched her ear — And she said, my dear . . .

And all of them, clapping time to the swaying of the old Bersagliera, break into the chorus: "Lovey if you like me . . ."

That day the German sailor had come up the alley in a bad temper. Hamburg, his native town, was being ravaged by bombs every night, and every day he was waiting for news of his wife and children. He had a warm nature, this German had, a southern nature in the body of a man from the North Sea. He had filled his own home with children, and now, when the war had moved him far away, tried to cool off his oppressive heat by attaching himself to prostitutes in the occupied countries.



* * *



"No cigarettes," he had said to Pin who was coming towards him to say guten Tag. Pin began to frown.

"Well, lad, you'll be feeling a bit nostalgic to-day, eh?" he said.

Now it was the German's turn to frown at Pin; he could not understand.

"Are you on your way to visit my sister, by any chance?" said Pin carelessly.

The German then said: "Sister not home?"

"What, don't you know?" Pin's expression was so sly he might have been brought up by priests. "Don't you know they've taken her off to hospital? Poor thing! It's bad, that disease, but curable now, if taken in time. Of course she'd had it on her for a bit. . . think of her in hospital, poor thing!"

The German's face looked like curdled milk. "Hos-pit-al? Di-sea-se?" he stuttered and sweated. Then in a window just above the ground floor appeared the head and shoulders of a young woman with a horse face and frizzy black hair.

"Don't you take any notice of him, Frick, don't take any notice of the little squirt," she screamed. "I'll make you pay for this, monkey-face, you nearly ruined me! Come on up, Frick, don't take any notice of him, he was only joking, devil take him!"

Pin put his tongue out at her. "I got you into a cold sweat, Kamarad," he said to the German, as he slipped away down a side-alley.

Sometimes, after a malicious joke of that kind, Pin finds himself with a bitter taste in his mouth, and wanders round the alleys alone, with everyone cursing him and pushing him aside. Then he longs to go off with a band of young companions to whom he could show the place where spiders make their nests, or with whom he could have battles among the bamboos in the river-bed. But Pin is not liked by boys of his own age; he is the friend of grown-ups, Pin is, he can say things to grown-ups that make them laugh or get angry, while other



* * *



boys can't even understand what grown-ups say to each other. Pin sometimes feels a longing to ask boys of his own age to let him play with them, to show him the way into the underground passage that goes right under the Market Square. But the other boys take no notice of him; sometimes they even set on him, for Pin has tiny thin arms and is the weakest of them all. Now and again they go and ask Pin to explain what happens between men and women; but he begins making fun of them in a loud voice down the alley, and the mothers call their sons inside: "Costanzo! Giacomino! How often have I told you not to go about with that nasty little boy!"

The mothers are right. All Pin talks about is men and women in bed, or men murdered or put in prison, stories picked up from grown-ups, fables they tell among themselves — the other little boys think — and which would be nice to stop and listen to if only Pin did not intersperse them with jeers and remarks they cannot understand.

So Pin is forced to take refuge again in the world of grown-ups, of men who turn their backs on him and are as incomprehensible and far-removed from him as they are from the other little boys, but who are easier to make fun of, with their yearning for women and their terror of the police, till they tire of him and begin to curse him.

Now Pin will go back into the smoky violet air of the tavern, and mouth obscenities and insults to the men there until he has whipped them up into a frenzy and they begin attacking each other; then he'll sing sentimental songs with all his might till he makes them cry and is crying himself, then invent new jokes and grimaces till he's hysterical with laughter, all to disperse the cloud of loneliness which settles round his heart on evenings like this.

But the men in the tavern now all have their backs turned, forming an impenetrable wall; there in the middle of them is a newcomer, a thin serious-looking man. As Pin comes in the men frown at him, then at the unknown man, and say some-



* * *



thing. Pin feels that the atmosphere is different; all the more reason to go up to the group with his hands in his pockets and say: "God, you ought to have seen that German's face!"

The men don't make their usual joking replies, but turn slowly round one by one. Frenchy Michel first frowns at him as if he's never seen him before, then says slowly: "You're a filthy little pimp."

The freckles cloud up like wasps round Pin's eyes, then he says calmly, though his eyes are slits: "Perhaps you'll tell me why?"

Giraffe twists his neck slightly round towards him and says: "Off you go, we don't want to see anyone who deals with Germans."

"With your contacts, you and your sister," says Gian the driver, "you'll end up as important Fascists."

Pin tries to put on the expression he uses when they make fun of him.

"Perhaps you'll tell me what all this is about," he says, "I've never had anything to do with the Fascio, not even the Balilla, and my sister goes with whoever she feels inclined to and does no one any harm."

Michel scratches his face a little. "The day everything changes — you know what I mean — the day everything changes we'll send your sister round town with her head as shaved and bare as a plucked chicken . . . And for you . . . for you we'll think up something you haven't even dreamt of."

Pin does his best to look unconcerned, but is obviously suffering inwardly, and is biting his lips. "On the day when you get a bit brighter," he says, "I'll explain how things are. First, that I and my sister each go our own way, and as for pimping you can go and do it for her yourself if you feel like it. Second, that my sister doesn't go with Germans because she particularly likes them, but because she's as international as the Red Cross; and the same way she goes with Germans now she'll go later with English, Negroes and anyone else who hap-



* * *



pens to turn up" . . . (all these are things Pin has learnt from listening to grown-ups, probably the very same ones he's talking to now. Why should he have to explain them?) "Third, the only dealings I've had with that German is getting cigarettes out of him, in return for which I've played tricks on him like the one I did to-day, which I won't tell you about as you've put me in a bad temper."

But the attempt to change the subject does not succeed. Gian the driver says: "Tricks! I've been in Croatia and there a bloody German only had to go looking round a village for women, and he was never seen again, nor was his corpse."

Michel says: "One day or the other he'll be found dead in a ditch, your German will."

The unknown man, who has been silent all this time without smiling or showing any signs of approval, now pulls Michel by the sleeve a little: "That's the sort of thing you mustn't say. Remember what I told you."

The others are now looking at Pin in silence. What can they want of him?

"Say," exclaims Michel, "have you seen what a pistol that sailor has?"

"Yes, a hell of a big pistol," replies Pin.

"Well," says Michel, "you must steal that pistol from him."

"How can I do that?" exclaims Pin.

"Try."

"But how? He always wears it clamped to his bottom. You go and steal it."

"Well, let's see . . . Doesn't he take his trousers off at a certain moment? Then he must take his pistol off too, surely. Go and steal it. Try."

"I will if I feel like it."

"Listen," says Giraffe, "we aren't joking here. If you want to be one of us you know what you must do. Otherwise



* * *



"Otherwise . . ."

"Otherwise . . . D'you know what a G.A.P.1 is?"

The unknown man gives Giraffe a nudge and shakes his head; he does not seem to like the way the others are behaving.

New words to Pin always have a halo of mystery, a hint of something dark and forbidden. A Gap? What could a Gap be?

"Yes, of course I know what it is," he says.

"What is it?" asks Giraffe.

"It's where you all blasted well belong, you and your family."

But the men aren't listening to him. The unknown man has signed to them to bring their heads close and is whispering to them and seems to be rebuking them for something, and they are making signs of agreement.

Pin is out of all this. He can creep away without saying a word; perhaps it's best, he thinks, not to mention that business of the pistol any more, it probably wasn't important, and they may have forgotten all about it.

But Pin has just reached the door when Michel raises his head and says: "Pin, then we're agreed about that."

Pin would like to begin acting the fool again, but suddenly he feels a child surrounded by grown-ups, and stands there with his hand on the jamb of the door.

"If not don't put your face in here again," says Michel.

Now Pin is outside, in the alley. Dusk is falling and lights are going on in the windows. Far away, down by the river, frogs are beginning to croak; at this time of the year boys spend their evenings hanging over pools, trying to catch them. If they do, the frogs feel slimy and slithery in their hands, smooth and naked as women.

A little boy in glasses and long trousers passes by: Battistino.

1 Gruppo Azione Patrioti. The smallest unit of the Italian partisan organisation, usually in towns.



* * *



"Battistino, d'you know what a Gap is?"

Battistino blinks with curiosity. "No, tell me. What is it?"

Pin breaks out into a peal of laughter. "Just go and ask your mother what a Gap is. Say to her, 'Mummy, will you give me a Gap?' Say that. She'll explain, you just see!"

Battistino goes off, looking vexed.

Pin wanders up the alley, which is almost dark now, and feels alone and lost amid all this talk of bloodshed and naked bodies which makes up men's lives.

CHAPTER TWO

His sister's room, from where Pin is looking at it, seems filled with mist; he can see a vertical strip crowded with objects and surrounded by muzzy shadows, with everything changing dimensions according to whether he puts his eye nearer or farther from the slit. It's like looking through a woman's stocking; the smell is the same too: his sister's smell emanating from the other side of the wooden partition and coming perhaps from those rumpled clothes and that bed which is never properly made, the sheets just flung back without ever being aired.

Pin's sister has always been careless about household matters ever since she was a child; when Pin was a baby and used to cry loudly in her arms, his head full of sores, she would leave him on a ledge of the wash-house and go off to skip with urchins around the chalk squares marked on the pavements. Every now and again their father's ship would return; all Pin could remember of him was being swung in the air in his big, bare arms, strong arms marked with black veins. But after their mother's death his visits became rarer



* * *



and rarer, until he was never seen again; people said he had another family in a city beyond the sea.

Pin now lives in a cubby-hole of a room, a sort of kennel beyond a wooden partition, with a high narrow slit of a window, cut sideways through the thick wall of the old house. Beyond it is his sister's room, from which the light comes in streaks through the cracks in the partition, cracks which make Pin's eyes squint with the effort to see what's going on in the rest of the room. Pin has spent hours and hours at those cracks ever since he was a baby, and he's trained his eyes to be like needle points; he knows everything that happens inside there, though the reasons for it all elude him. When, in the end, he curls up in his little bunk with his arms round his chest, the shadows of the tiny room transform themselves into strange dreams, of bodies chasing each other, hitting and embracing, till something big and hot and unknown happens which paralyses Pin and yet caresses and warms him too; it seems the explanation of everything, like the faint distant memory of some forgotten happiness.

The German is now wandering round the room in his vest, his arms pink and meaty as thighs; every now and again he comes right up to the crack in the partition; at one moment Pin can also see his sister's legs, twirling in the air, then plunging under the sheets. Now Pin has to twist round to see where the German is putting down the belt with the pistol on it; there it is, hung on the back of a chair; Pin wishes he had an arm as narrow as the slit so that he could pass it through, reach the weapon and pull it towards him. Now the German is naked except for his vest; he's laughing; he always laughs when he's naked because he has a shy nature, deep down, like a girl's. He jumps into bed and puts out the light. Pin knows that a little time will go by in darkness and silence before the bed begins to creak.

Now is the moment. Pin must enter the room with bare feet, on all fours, and pull the belt down from the chair with-



* * *



out making any noise; all this is just not a game to laugh and joke about afterwards; no, it is connected with something secret and mysterious said by the men in the tavern with an opaque look in the whites of their eyes. Yes, Pin would like always to be friends with grown-ups, for them always to joke with him and to take him into their confidence. Pin loves grown-ups, he loves scoring off them — those strong stupid grown-ups all of whose secrets he knows. He even loves the German. And now he is doing something irreparable; perhaps he'll never be able to joke with the German again, after this; and things will be different with the men in the tavern, too; they'll have a link with him beyond laughter and obscenities, and will always look at him with those mysterious frowns and ask him strange things in low voices. Pin would like to stretch himself out on his little bed and lie there thinking with his eyes open, listening to the German and his sister on the other side of the partition, lie there imagining himself being accepted by bands of boys as their leader because he knows so much more than they do, and them all going out against the grownups together and beating them up and doing such wonderful things that the grown-ups are forced to admire him too and ask him to be their leader, loving him and stroking his head at the same time. But now, instead of that, he has to move about at night with the grown-ups hating him, and steal a pistol from a German, things not done by other boys, who play with tin pistols and wooden swords. What would they say if Pin went among them next day, and gradually revealed to them a real pistol, all shiny and menacing and looking as if it were about to go off on its own? Perhaps they would be frightened, and Pin would also be frightened of keeping such a thing under his jacket; all he needs, he thinks, to terrify the grown-ups so much that they fall down fainting and asking for mercy, is one of those toy pistols that fire a strip of red caps.

Instead of which Pin is now crawling on all fours into his sister's room, bare-foot, with his head already beyond the



* * *



curtain, into that smell of male and female which goes straight to the nostrils. He can see the shadows of the furniture in the room, the bed, the chair, the oblong bidet on its triangular stand. There; now that dialogue of groans is beginning from the bed, and he can creep in on all fours, taking care to go very slowly. Perhaps, though, Pin would be pleased if the floor creaked, the German heard and suddenly put on the light, and he had to run out of the house on bare feet with his sister shouting behind him: "Little swine!"; pleased, perhaps, if the whole neighbourhood heard too and he could tell the story to Driver and Frenchy, with so many details that they would believe him and say: "All right. It went badly. Don't let's talk about it any more."

The floor does in fact creak, but so many other things are creaking at that moment that the German does not hear. Pin is now touching the belt, and it turns out to be quite solid, not magical, and it slips down from the back of the chair almost frighteningly easy, without even banging on the floor. Now "it" has happened; the fear he had only imagined before has become real fear. The belt must now be hurriedly wrapped round the holster, and all of it pushed under his vest without getting entangled in his arms and legs; the next thing to do is go back on his tracks on all fours, very slowly and without ever taking his tongue from between his teeth; if he took that tongue away perhaps something awful would happen.

Once out of the room he realises that he can't now go back to his little bed and hide the pistol under the mattress, as he does with apples stolen from the fruit market. In a short time the German will be getting up and looking for his pistol and turning the whole place upside down.

Pin goes out into the alley; the pistol is not worrying him very much at the moment; hidden like that in his clothes it is an object like any other and he can forget he has it; Pin rather regrets his own indifference, and would like to feel at least a shiver to remind him of it. A real pistol. A real pistol. Pin



* * *



tries to excite himself with the thought. Someone who has a real pistol can do anything, he's like a grown-up. He can threaten to kill men and women and do whatever he likes with them.

Pin now thinks he will grasp the pistol and walk round with it always pointed at people; no one will be able to take it away from him and everyone will be afraid of him. But the pistol, wrapped in its belt, is still under his vest, and he cannot make up his mind to touch it; in a way he almost hopes that when he looks for it it will have vanished, melted away from the heat of his body.

The place to look at the pistol is a hidden flight of steps under an arch where children go to play hide-and-seek, lit only by a glimmer of light from a broken lantern. Pin unrolls the belt, opens the holster, and with a gesture as if he were taking a cat by the neck pulls out the pistol. It is really very big and threatening; if Pin had the courage to play with it he would pretend it was a cannon. But he handles it as if it were a bomb. The safety-catch, where can the safety-catch be?

Finally he decides to grasp it by the butt, though he's careful not to put his finger near the trigger; he holds it tightly; even like this he can imagine using it properly and pointing it against anyone he wants. Pin first points it at the gutter-pipe, right up against the metal, then at a finger, making a fierce face, drawing back his head and hissing: "Your money or your life"; then he finds an old shoe and points it against that, first the heel, then the inside; then he pushes the barrel down into the toe. What fun! A shoe, such an ordinary object, particularly for a cobbler's apprentice like him, and a pistol, such a mysterious, almost unreal thing; by putting them up against each other he can do wonders, make them tell marvellous tales.

But then suddenly Pin cannot resist the temptation any more and points the pistol against his temple; it makes his head swim. On it moves, until it touches the skin and he can



* * *



feel the coldness of the steel. Suppose he put his finger on the trigger now? No, it's better to press the mouth of the barrel against his temple until it hurts, and feel the circle of steel with its empty centre where the bullets come from. Perhaps if he suddenly pulls the gun away from his temple, the suction of the air will make a shot go off; no, it doesn't go off. Now he can put the barrel into his mouth and feel its taste against his tongue. Then, the most frightening of all, put it up to his eyes and look right into it, down the dark barrel which seems deep as a well. Once Pin saw a boy who had shot himself in the eye with a sporting-gun being taken off to hospital; his face was half-covered by a great splodge of blood, and the other half with little black spots from the gunpowder.

Pin has now played with a real pistol. He has played with it enough, and can give it to the men who asked for it, he is now longing to give it to them, in fact. When he has not got it any more it will be the same as if he'd never stolen it, and the German can be as furious as he likes and Pin can laugh at him behind his back again.

His first impulse is to rush into the tavern and call out: "I've got it! I've got it!" amid general enthusiasm and exclamations of surprise. Then it occurs to him that it would be cleverer to say: "Guess what I've brought!" and keep them waiting a little before telling them. But they would be sure to think of the pistol at once, so he had better mention it at first and then go on to give them a dozen different versions of what happened, hinting that things went badly, until when they are on tenterhooks and have lost the drift, he'd put the pistol on the table and say: "Look what I've found in my pocket," and watch the expressions on their faces.

Pin enters the tavern silently, on tiptoe; the men are still talking round a table, their elbows looking as if they had taken root. Only the unknown man is no longer there; his chair is empty. Pin is now standing behind them and they have not noticed him; he waits for them to catch sight of him suddenly



* * *



and start up with questioning looks. But no one turns. Pin moves a chair. Giraffe twists his neck round and frowns at him, then goes on talking in a low voice.

"Hey, men," exclaims Pin.

They give him a glance.

"Uglyface," says Giraffe, in a friendly way.

No one says anything else.

"Well . . ." says Pin.

"Well . . ." says Gian the driver. "What's new?"

Pin is beginning to feel rather deflated.

"Well . . ." says Michel the Frenchy. "Feeling low? Sing us a song, Pin."

They're pretending not to be interested, thinks Pin, but really they're longing to know what I've done.

"Don't you worry about that," exclaims Giraffe. "You worry about getting hold of that German's pistol, as we'd agreed."

Pin's ears go up. Now he'll say: "Just guess . . ."

"Make sure you don't lose sight of it, once you've set eyes on it."

This is not what Pin expected. Why do they care so little about it now? He begins to wish he had not taken the pistol, and feels like going back to the German and putting it back where it was.

"For a pistol," says Michel. "It's not worth risking much. Anyway it's an old model; heavy, it sticks."

"Meanwhile," says Giraffe, "we must show the committee we're doing something, that's the important thing." And they continue their discussion in low voices.

Pin cannot hear what they are saying. Now he's sure he won't give them the pistol; he has tears in his eyes and can feel his gums drawn with rage. Grown-ups are an untrustworthy treacherous lot, they don't take their games in the serious wholehearted way children do, and their own games are so complicated and involved that it's difficult to discover



* * *



what the real one is. Before it seemed that they were playing a game with the unknown man against the German, now they are playing one on their own against the unknown man; what they say can never be trusted.

"Well, sing us something, then, Pin," they say now, as if nothing had happened, as if there had never been that definite pact between them, a pact consecrated by that mysterious word: Gap.

"Ale," says Pin, pale, his lips trembling. He knows he cannot sing now. He feels like bursting into tears; instead of which he breaks into a shriek high enough to break the eardrums, ending in a string of curses: "Bastards! Sons of filthy stinking cows of whores!"

The others stare at him, wondering what is wrong with him, but Pin has already rushed out of the tavern.

Outside, his first impulse is to look for that man, the one they call "Committee", and give him the pistol; he's the only one for whom Pin feels any respect now, though he had been so quiet and serious he had made Pin distrustful before. But now Pin feels that he is the only person who can understand him and admire what he has done; perhaps "Committee" would take Pin off to fight the Germans with him, just the two of them, armed with that pistol, firing from street corners. But who knew where Committee had gone to now? Pin cannot ask around after him, as no one had ever seen him before.

So Pin decides that he will keep the pistol himself and not give it to anyone or tell anyone that he has it. He'll just hint that he controls a terrible power, and everyone will obey him. Whoever owns a real pistol must be able to play wonderful games, games which no other boy has ever played. But Pin is a boy who does not know how to play games, and cannot take part in the games either of children or grown-ups. So he will go off now, away from everyone, and play with his



* * *



pistol all on his own, games that no one else knows and no one else can ever learn.

It is dark now. Pin turns out of the huddle of old houses into paths running between vegetable patches and rubbish-pits. The wire-netting around the crops throws a network of grey shadows over the moonlit ground. The hens are now sleeping in rows on their perches in the coops, and the frogs are out of the water and chorusing away along the bed of the whole torrent, from source to mouth. What would happen if he shot at a frog? There'd be nothing left, perhaps, but green slime squashed on the stones.

Pin wanders along the paths which wind along the side of the torrent, stony parts which no one cultivates. Here there are paths which he alone knows and which the other boys would love to be told about. There is a place where spiders make their nests. Only Pin knows it. It's the only one in the whole valley, perhaps in the whole area. No other boy except Pin has ever heard of spiders that make nests.

Perhaps one day Pin will find a friend, a real friend, who understands him and whom he can understand, and then to him, and only to him, will he show the place where the spiders have their lairs. It's on a stony little path which winds down to the torrent between earthy grassy slopes. There, in the grass, the spiders make their nests, in tunnels lined with dry grass. But the wonderful thing is that the nests have tiny doors, also made of dried grass, tiny round doors which can open and shut.

When Pin has played some particularly cruel joke and has laughed so much that a heavy sadness has finally filled his chest, he wanders all alone along the paths in the little valley, looking for the place where the spiders make their nests. With a long stick he can probe right into the nests and skewer the spider, a small black spider with little grey markings on it, like those on the summer dresses of old village women.



* * *



It amuses Pin to break the doors of the nests down and skewer the spiders on sticks, and to catch grasshoppers and gaze close into their little horse-like faces, then cut them up into pieces and make strange designs with their legs on a smooth stone.

Pin is cruel to animals; to him they are as monstrous and incomprehensible as grown-ups; it must be horrible to be an insect, to be green, and always to be frightened that a human being like him might come along, with a huge face full of red and black freckles and fingers that can pull grasshoppers to bits.

Pin is now all alone among the spiders' nests, and around him is night, infinite as the chorus of the frogs. He is alone but he has the pistol with him; now he puts on the belt with its holster to dangle over his bottom like the German; only the German was fat and the belt hangs down on Pin like the bandoliers worn by warriors in the films. Now he can pull the pistol out with a grand gesture as if he were drawing a sword, and shout: "To the assault, my men!" as boys do when they play at pirates. But he cannot understand what pleasure those silly fools get in doing that; Pin, after jumping around on the grass for a time, waving the pistol and aiming it at the olive-trees, is already bored and does not know what to do with the gun next.

At that moment the spiders underground are gnawing away at flies or coupling together, males and females, giving out little threads of slime; they are as filthy as men are, Pin thinks, and he pushes the barrel of the pistol into the opening of a nest, longing to kill them. What would happen if a shot went off? The houses are some way off and no one would realise where it came from.

Pin now has his finger on the trigger, with the pistol pointed into a spider's nest; it is difficult to resist the longing to press the trigger, but the safety-catch must be on and he does not know how to cope with it.



* * *



Then a shot goes off so suddenly that Pin does not even realise he has fired it; the pistol jumps back-in his hand, smoking and dirty all over with earth. The tunnel of the nest has collapsed; above it is a little furrow of earth and the grass is singed.

At first Pin is terrified, then delighted. How lovely it was, how good the powder smells! But then he is terrified again to find the frogs have suddenly all gone silent and not a sound is to be heard, as if that shot had killed off the entire world. Then, very far away, a frog begins to croak again, and another nearer by, and another nearer still, till the chorus starts up again and the croaking seems to Pin louder, much louder, than before. From the houses a dog barks and a woman calls from a window. Pin thinks he won't fire again, for that silence and then those sounds have frightened him. But he'll come back another night and nothing will frighten him then; he'll fire every round in the pistol, also at the bats and the cats prowling round the chicken-coops.

Now he must find a place to hide the pistol; in the trunk of an olive-tree; or to bury it would be better; or better still to scoop out a hole in the grassy bank where the spiders' nests are and cover it over with mould and grass. Pin begins scooping away with his hands at a part where the earth is already honeycombed with tunnels made by the spiders, takes the pistol off its belt and puts it into the holster, and covers it all over with mould and grass and bits from the walls of chewed grass made by the spiders. Then he sets off back along the little channels running above the torrent-bed, with narrow lines of stones to walk on.

As he goes along Pin is dangling the end of the belt in the water and whistling so as not to hear the chorus of frogs which seems to be increasing every moment.

Now he is among the little gardens and the rubbish dumps outside the houses. As he reaches them he hears voices, not talking in Italian. Pin often goes round at night in spite



* * *



of the curfew and the patrols don't say anything to him because he's only a child. But this time he is afraid, as it occurs to him that those Germans there may be looking for the person who fired a gun. They come towards him and he tries to run away; but they shout something and catch him up. Pin takes up a position of defence, holding the belt as if it were a whip. But that is what the Germans are looking at, it's the belt they are after; and suddenly they take him by the scruff of the neck and drag him off. Pin talks ceaselessly; begs, complains, insults, but the Germans do not understand any of it; they are worse, much worse, than the municipal guards.

The alley is crowded with armed German and Fascist patrols, and men they have arrested, including Michel the Frenchy. Pin has to pass through these on his way up the alley. It is very dark; the only light comes from the top of the steps, from a lamp that only lets out a glimmer because of the black-out.

By the light of the glimmer, at the top of the alley, Pin sees the sailor, his fat face distorted with fury, pointing a finger at him.

CHAPTER THREE

Yes, the Germans are worse than the municipal guards. With the guards Pin could at least, if nothing else, begin joking, and say: "If you let me go I'll arrange for you to go to bed free with my sister."

But the Germans cannot even understand what he says, and the Fascists are men he has never seen before, men who do not even know who his sister is. Both are strange types; the Germans are as rosy, fleshy, and hairless as the Fascists are black, bony, and bluish in the face, with rat-like moustaches.



* * *



Next morning, at the German headquarters, Pin is the first to be interrogated. He is faced by a German officer with a baby-like face, and a Fascist interpreter with a little beard. In a corner is the sailor, and, sitting near him, Pin's sister. They are all looking bored; the sailor seems to have made up a long story about the stolen pistol, so as not to get any blame for letting it be stolen, and must have told a lot of lies.

On the officer's table is lying the belt, and the first question Pin is asked is: "How did you get hold of this?" Pin is half asleep; he has spent the night on the floor in a passage with Michel the Frenchy near him and every time Pin was getting off to sleep Michel gave him a violent dig in the ribs with his elbow and whispered: "If you talk I'll kill you."

Pin had replied each time: "Oh, hell take you."

Michel said: "You mustn't say a word about us, d'you understand? Not even if they beat you."

And Pin replied: "Oh, devil take you."

"We've all agreed that if the others don't find me returning home they'll kill you."

And Pin replied: "I hope your soul rots."

Michel is one of those people who used to work in hotels in France before the war; he'd had quite a good time there on the whole, though sometimes they would call him macaroni or cochon fasciste, then in '40 he began being put into concentration camps and everything had gone wrong with him since: unemployment, repatriation, law-breaking.

Suddenly the sentries had noticed that Pin and Michel were talking to each other and took Pin away as he was the principal accused and was not supposed to communicate with anyone. Pin could not get off to sleep; he was used to being beaten and that did not frighten him very much, but he was in an agony of doubt about the best line to take up at the interrogation. He would have loved to revenge himself on Michel and the others and tell the Germans straight away that he had given the pistol to the men in the tavern, and



* * *



also that they had formed a Gap; but to turn into an informer would be another irreparable action, like stealing the pistol; it would mean he would never be stood another drink at the tavern, or be able to sing or listen to dirty stories there. And then he might also involve that man Committee, who was always so glum and miserable, and Pin would have been sorry about that as Committee was the only decent man among the lot. Pin would like Committee to arrive now, all wrapped up in his raincoat, enter the interrogation room and say, "I told him to take the pistol." That would be a fine gesture, worthy of Committee, and no harm would come to him for it either, for just as the S.S. were going to lead him off to prison, there would be a shout, like at the cinema, of: "Our side's coming!" and Committee's men would rush in and set them all free.

When the German officer asks Pin about the belt he replies: "I found it." Then the officer takes up the belt and hits him over the cheek with all his strength. Pin sways and nearly falls; he feels as if bunches of needles had been stuck into all his freckles; the blood flows down his already swollen cheek.

His sister screams. Pin cannot help thinking how often she herself had hit him just as hard, and that now she's acting and just pretending to be sensitive. The Fascist interpreter leads his sister away, and the sailor begins some complicated speech in German, pointing at Pin, but the officer signs for him to be quiet. They ask Pin if he has decided to tell the truth; who sent him to steal the pistol?

"I took it to shoot at a cat, intending to bring it back," says Pin, but he cannot manage to put an ingenuous expression on his face, which feels swollen all over. He is overwhelmed by a vague longing for affection.

Another blow on the other cheek, not so hard this time, though. Then Pin, remembering his method with the municipal guards, lets out a piercing shriek even before the belt has touched him, and goes on screaming. A scene begins



* * *



with Pin jumping round the room, shrieking and sobbing, and the Germans running after him trying to catch him and hit him again, while he shouts protests and insults and wilder and wilder replies to the questions they continue to ask him.

"Where did you put that pistol?"

Now Pin can tell the truth: "In the spiders' nests."

"Where are they?"

Pin, at the bottom of his heart, would prefer to be friends with these people. The municipal guards also used to hit him first, and then start joking with him about his sister. If he could make friends with these men too it would be fine to explain to them where the spiders make their nests and arouse their interest and show them all the places. Then they would all go off to the tavern together and buy wine and move on later to his sister's room to drink, smoke, and watch her dance. But the Germans and Fascists, a hairless and blueshaven lot, don't seem people with whom any undertanding is possible. They go on hitting Pin, so he will never tell them where the spiders make their nests; he has never told his friends, so why should he tell them?

Instead he begins giving great deep exaggerated sobs, like the sobs of a newborn baby, mingled with screams and curses and stamping of feet which can be heard all over the German headquarters. No, he won't betray Michel, Giraffe, Gian and the others; they are his real friends. Pin is now full of admiration for them because they are against these swine here. Michel can be sure Pin won't betray him, he must be hearing the screams and saying to himself: "He's a lad of iron, Pin is, he's holding out and not talking."

In fact the noise Pin is making can be heard over the whole building; the officers in the other rooms begin complaining; there's always a coming and going for permits and appeals at the German headquarters, and it's not good that everyone should hear a child being beaten up too.

The officer with the baby face gets an order to stop the



* * *



interrogation; he can go on another day and in a different place. But it is difficult to silence Pin now. They try to explain that it's all over, but their voices are drowned in his screams. Then a number of them cluster round him and try to calm him down, but he breaks away from them and screams louder than ever. Then they bring his sister in hoping she'll console him, and he nearly jumps up at her and bites her. After a time there's a whole group of Germans and of Fascist militiamen following him around and trying to soothe him down; one of them strokes his head, another tries to dry his tears.

Finally, exhausted, panting, breathless, Pin stops. A militiaman is now detailed to take him off to prison and bring him back next day for more interrogation.

Pin comes out of the office with this armed militiaman following him; his face looks tiny under its thatch of hair, his eyes are squeezed dry and his freckles washed by tears.

On the threshold he meets Michel on his way out, a free man.

"Hallo, Pin," says he, "I'm going home. I'm on duty tomorrow."

Pin frowns at him, his eyes red, his mouth open.

"Yes, I've asked to join the Black Brigade.1 They've told me what the advantages are and the pay they get. Then, you know, during round-ups one can snoop around people's houses and take what one wants. To-morrow they'll give me my weapons and uniform. Keep your chin up, Pin."

The militiaman taking Pin to prison is wearing a black cap with a red Fascio embroidered on it. He's young and very short, with a rifle taller than himself. He's not one of the blue-shaven type of Fascists.

They have been walking along for five minutes and neither of them has yet opened his mouth.

1 The Black Brigades were formed by the Fascists early in 1944 to hunt members of the Resistance.



* * *



Then, "If you want to, you can get into the Black Brigade too," the militiaman says to Pin.

"If she wants, that cow of a grandmother of yours can get into it too," Pin replies readily.

The militiaman pretends to be offended.

"Hey, who d'you think you're with? Hey, who taught you that?" and he stops.

"Go on, take me to the blasted prison, hurry up about it," says Pin.

"Why, d'you think you'll be left quiet in prison? You'll be taken off for interrogation all the time, and beaten till you're bruised all over. D'you like being beaten?"

"You, on the other hand, should go to hell."

"I'll send you to hell."

"And I you, your father and your grandfather too," says Pin.

"If you don't want them to beat you, join the Black Brigade," he says.

"And then?" says Pin.

"And then go out on round-ups."

"Do you go out on round-ups?"

"No. I'm stuck at headquarters."

"Liar. I wonder how many rebels you've killed and don't want to admit it."

"I swear. Never been out on a round-up."

"Except the ones you have been on."

"Except the one they captured me on."

"They captured you in a round-up too?"

"Yes, a fine round-up it was, really fine. Wiped up everyone. I was hiding in a chicken-coop. A really fine round-up, it was."

Pin is annoyed with Michel, not because he thinks Michel has behaved badly and become a traitor. What annoys Pin is to find himself making a mistake every time and never being able to forsee what grown-ups will do next. When



* * *



one of them seems to be thinking in one way, Pin finds he's thinking in another; he can never foresee what the changes will be.

Pin, at the bottom of his heart, feels he'd like to be in the Black Brigade too, and go around all hung with badges and tommy-guns, terrifying people and being treated by the militiamen as one of them, linked together by the barrier of hatred separating them from other men. Perhaps, thinking it over, he will decide to go into the Black Brigade; at least he could get the pistol and perhaps be allowed to keep it and carry it about openly on his uniform; and then he could also get his own back on the German officer and the Fascist sergeant by making fools of them, and take his revenge in jeers for all the sobs and screams.

There is a song of the Black Brigade which goes: And they call us the scamps of Mussolini... followed by various obscenities. The Black Brigade can sing obscene songs in the streets because they are "the scamps of Mussolini"; that's wonderful, thinks Pin. But this militiaman is a fool and gets on Pin's nerves, so he replies rudely to everything he says.

The prison is in a big villa requisitioned from English owners, for the old fortress down on the port is being used by the Germans as an anti-aircraft post. It is a strange villa, in the middle of a wood of Arancaria pines, and must have looked like a prison even before, with its turrets and terraces and chimney-pots turning in the wind, and all the railings that were there before as well as those added since. The owners must have led solitary and enclosed lives in the big rooms with their wooden floors, while the wind turned the creaking chimney-pots; they must have had big dogs wandering up and down the staircases, and servants who loathed them and perhaps a daughter who would suddenly jump up from table and burst into tears, no one knew why.

Now the rooms are used as cells, strange cells with parquet and linoleum floors, great walled-up marble fireplaces,



* * *



and basins and bidets stopped up with rags. There are armed sentries on the turrets, and on the terraces the prisoners queue up for their rations, then scatter for their daily airing.

It is feeding time when Pin arrives, and suddenly he realises that he's very hungry. They give him a bowl too and put him in the queue.

Many of the prisoners are in for evading the call-up, and also for various infringements of war-time restrictions, such as unlicensed slaughtering of animals or trafficking in petrol or pounds sterling. Nowadays there are very few ordinary criminals, for no one bothers about thieves; those there have past sentences to serve and are too old to ask to be called up and get them remitted. The political prisoners can be distinguished by the bruises on their faces and by their awkward movements on bones broken during interrogation.

Pin is a "political" too; it shows at once. He's eating his soup, when up comes a big heavily-built youth with a face even more livid and swollen than Pin's, and shaven hair under a peaked cap.

"They've fixed you nicely, comrade," he says.

Pin looks at him, not knowing how to treat him yet.

"And you too," he says.

The youth with the shaven head says, "They interrogate me every day and beat me up with a whip made of gristle."

He says this very grandly, as if they were doing him a special honour.

"If you want my soup, here you are," he says to Pin. "I can't eat it, as my throat's full of blood."

And he spits out a reddish froth on to the ground. Pin looks at him with interest; he has always admired anyone who manages to spit blood, and would like to see someone with tuberculosis spitting.

"Then you're T.B.," he says to the shaven youth.

"They may have given me T.B.," agrees the other importantly. Pin looks at him admiringly; perhaps they'll be-



* * *



come real friends. He has also given Pin his soup and that pleases Pin very much because he's hungry.

"If they go on like this," says the youth with the shaven head, "they'll ruin me for life."

Pin says: "Then why don't you join the Black Brigade?"

The youth with the shaven head gets up then and stares at him from his swollen eyes: "Hey, d'you know who I am?"

"No, who are you?" exclaims Pin.

"Have you ever heard of Red Wolf?"

"Red Wolf!" Who hasn't heard of Red Wolf? Every time there's an attack against the Fascists, at every bomb that explodes in one of their headquarters, at every spy who vanishes without anyone knowing what has happened to him, people whisper the name of Red Wolf. Pin also knows that Red Wolf is sixteen years old and used to work at the "Todt"1 as a mechanic; others who'd worked at the "Todt" to avoid the call-up had told Pin about him and how he wore a Russian-style cap and always talked about Lenin and how he'd been nicknamed GPU. He also had a passion for dynamite and time-bombs and had, it seemed, gone into the "Todt" to learn how to make mines. Then one day the railway bridge blew up and GPU did not appear at the "Todt" any more; he was in the mountains and came down into the town at night, carrying a big pistol and wearing a white, red, and green star on his Russian-style cap. He had let his hair grow long and now called himself Red Wolf.

And now here was Red Wolf standing in front of him, with his Russian-style cap which no longer had a star on it, his big head shaved, his eyes swollen, and spitting blood.

"Yes, are you him?" asks Pin.

"I am," says Red Wolf.

"And when did they take you?"

1 The German Todt organisation was responsible for building defences, and Italian workers in it were exempted from military service.



* * *



"Thursday on the Borgo bridge; armed and with the star on my cap."

"And what will they do to you?"

"Perhaps," he says with his air of importance, "perhaps they'll shoot me."

"When?"

"Perhaps to-morrow."

"What're you going to do?"

Red Wolf spits blood on the ground. "Who are you?" he asks Pin. Pin gives his name. He has always wanted to meet Red Wolf, to see him appear one night in the alleys of the old town, but Pin has always been a little afraid of him, because of that sister of his who goes with Germans.

"Why are you here?" asks Red Wolf, in a tone almost as peremptory as the Fascists during an interrogation.

Now it is Pin's turn to give himself airs.

"I stole a pistol from a German."

Red Wolf gives him a look of approval, then asks in a serious voice:

"Are you part of a band?" Pin says, "No."

"You're not organised? Not in a Gap?"

Pin is delighted to hear that word again. "Yes, yes," he says, "Gap!"

"Who're you with?"

Pin thinks a little, then says: "With Committee."

"Who?"

"Committee. Don't you know him?" Pin tries to put on a superior air, but it doesn't work. "A thin man, with a light-coloured raincoat."

"You're lying. The committee is made up of lots of people, and no one knows who they are. They're preparing the rising. You don't know anything."

"If no one knows who they are, you don't either."

Pin doesn't like talking to boys of Red Wolf's age be-



* * *



cause they always try to be superior and never treat him confidentially, but like a child.

"I know," says Red Wolf, "I'm one of the Sim."1

Another mysterious word. Sim! Gap! What a lot of words there must be; Pin wishes he knew them all.

"I know all about you, though," he says, "I know that you are also called GPU."

"That's not true," says Red Wolf, "you mustn't call me that."

"Why not?"

"Because we're not out for social revolution now, but for national liberation. When Italy's been liberated by the people, we'll nail the bourgeoisie down to their responsibilities."

"What?"

"Just that. We'll nail the bourgeoisie down to their responsibilities. The brigade commissar explained it all to me."

"D'you know who my sister is?" The question has nothing to do with what they are saying, but Pin is tired of talking of things he knows nothing about and prefers to get back to his usual subjects.

"No," says Red Wolf.

"The Dark Girl of Long Alley."

"Who's she?"

"What d'you mean, who's she? Everyone knows my sister. The Dark Girl of Long Alley."

It seems incredible that a youth like Red Wolf has never

heard of his sister. In the Old Town children of six are already

beginning to talk about her and telling girls of the same age

what she does when she's in bed with a man.

"Hey, you don't know who my sister is. That's a good one..."

1Servizio Informazione Militare — Military Intelligence Service — the term could apply to either side.



* * *



Pin would like to call the other prisoners round and begin his usual clowning.

"I don't even look at women at the moment," says Red Wolf, "there'll be time after the rising. . . ."

"But suppose they shoot you to-morrow?" says Pin.

"We'll just see who gets it in first, them shooting me or me shooting them."

"What d'you mean?"

Red Wolf thinks a little, then leans over and whispers in Pin's ear:

"I've got a plan and if it comes off I'll have escaped by to-morrow, and then I'll make all these Fascist swine pay one by one for beating me up."

"Escape? Where to?"

"Back to the detachment. To Biondo's. And we'll organise an action that will really make them sit up."

"Will you take me with you?"

"No."

"Please, Wolfy, take me with you."

"My name is Red Wolf," says the other. "When the commissar told me that GPU wasn't a good name I asked him what I could call myself and he said 'Wolf.' Then I told him that I wanted a name with something red in it because the wolf's a Fascist animal, and he said: 'Then call yourself Red Wolf.' "

"Red Wolf," says Pin. "Listen, Red Wolf; why don't you want to take me with you?"

"Because you're only a child, that's why."

From the beginning, ever since Pin and Red Wolf had talked about the stolen pistol, Pin had felt that they could become real friends. But now here is Red Wolf treating him like a child again and that gets on Pin's nerves. With other youths of Red Wolf's age Pin can at least assume superior airs by talking about women, but this subject does not seem to



* * *



work with him. But how fine it would be to go around in a band with Red Wolf and make explosives big enough to blow up bridges and walk through towns firing machine-gun bursts against patrols. It might even be better than the Black Brigade. Only the Black Brigade wears a death's head as a badge, and that makes more of a show than a tricolour star.

It seems quite unreal to be standing there talking to someone who may be shot next day, to be on that terrace full of men crouching on the ground over their food, under chimneypots turning in the wind and warders watching from turrets with machine-guns trained. It's like some enchanted play, surrounded by that park full of the black shadows of those strange pines. Pin has almost forgotten his beating, and is beginning to wonder whether it's all a dream.

Now the warders are getting the prisoners in line before returning to their cells.

"Where's your cell?" Red Wolf asks Pin.

"I don't know where they'll put me," says Pin, "I haven't been in yet."

"I'd like to know where you are," says Red Wolf.

"Why?" asks Pin.

"You'll see."

Pin is always irritated by people who keep on saying: "You'll see."

But suddenly, in the line of prisoners beginning to march away, he thinks he has seen a face he knows, knows very well indeed.

"Say, Red Wolf, d'you know that man ahead, the one who's so thin and walks in that strange way ... ?"

"He's an ordinary criminal. Leave him alone. They aren't to be trusted, ordinary criminals."

"Why not? I know him!"

"They are proletarians without a class-consciousness," says Red Wolf.



* * *



CHAPTER FOUR

"PIETROMAGRO!"

"Pin!"

When a warder takes him to his cell and opens the door Pin gives a cry of surprise; he'd been right about the prisoner he saw on the terrace, the one who walked in that odd way; it really was Pietromagro.

"D'you know him?" asks the warder.

"Bloody hell do I not! He's my master!"

"Good. Then the whole concern is now transferred here," says the warder, and locks the door. Pietromagro had been inside a month or two, but to Pin, seeing him, it seems that years have passed. He's all skin and bone, yellow skin covered with hair hanging from his neck in flabby folds. He is sitting on a heap of straw in a corner of the cell, with his stick-like arms along his sides. When he sees Pin he raises them. Up to now Pin's only relations with his master have been shouts and blows; but now, finding him here in this state, he feels a mixture of pleasure and sorrow.

Pietromagro even speaks differently: "Pin! You here too, Pin!" he says in a hoarse, wailing tone, without any curses at all; and it's plain that he too is pleased to see Pin. He takes him by the wrists, but not in the way he always did before, to twist them; and looks at him from yellow eyes. "I'm ill," he says, "I'm very ill, Pin. These swine here won't send me to the infirmary. Everything's upside down here; the place is full of nothing but political prisoners and one day they'll end by mistaking me for a 'political' and putting me up against a wall."

"They beat me," says Pin, and shows the marks.

"Then you're a 'political' too," exclaims Pietromagro.

"Yes, yes," says Pin. "A political."



* * *



Pietromagro thinks this over. "Of course, of course, a 'political.' I'd begun to think, seeing you here, that you'd started a career as a jail-bird. For when once one gets into prison one's never away from it long; as soon as one's freed one falls back in again. But of course if you're a 'political' it's a different thing. Why, if I'd known more as a young man I'd have become a 'political' too. Ordinary crimes don't get one anywhere; steal a little and one goes to prison, steal a lot and one has villas and palaces. But commit a political crime, and though one goes inside just the same, it's at least with a hope of a better world, without prisons, one day. That's what I was told by a 'political' who was in prison with me years ago, a man with a black beard. He's dead now. For I've known every kind of convict, ordinary ones, smugglers, tax-evaders; but I've never known any as decent as the 'politicals.' "

Pin cannot quite grasp the meaning of this speech but he feels sorry for Pietromagro and stands quietly looking at the veins swelling and ebbing on his neck.

"Now, you see, I'm ill. I need treatment, instead of which here I am lying on the ground. I haven't blood running in my veins any more, but urine. I can't drink wine, and I long to get drunk for a week. The penal code's all wrong, Pin; it lists everything one mustn't do in life, stealing, murdering, receiving stolen goods, but it doesn't say a word about what one should do instead of all that, when one finds oneself in certain situations. Pin, are you listening to me?"

Pin looks at his shaggy yellow face, and feels his breath panting over him.

"Pin, I'm going to die. You must swear to do something. Say 'I swear' to what I'm going to say. 'I swear that I'll fight all my life long to do away with prisons and to rewrite the penal code.' Now say 'I swear.' "

"I swear," says Pin.

"Will you remember, Pin?"

"Yes, Pietromagro," says Pin.



* * *



"Now come and help me catch my lice," says Pietromagro. "I'm full of them. D'you know how to crack 'em?"

"Yes," says Pin. Pietromagro begins looking inside his shirt, then hands Pin a corner of it.

"Have a good look in the seams," he says. Catching Pietromagro's lice is not much fun, but Pin feels sorry for the poor man, with his veins full of urine and without perhaps much longer to live.

"And the shop, how's the shop going?" asks Pietromagro. Neither apprentice nor master has ever liked his job much; but now they begin discussing the work still to be done, the price of leather and thread, and who will mend shoes for the neighbourhood now that both of them are in prison. Soon they are sitting on the straw in a corner of the cell, cracking lice and talking about welting and soling, without ever abusing their jobs, which has never happened in their whole lives.

"Say, Pietromagro," exclaims Pin, "why don't you set up as a cobbler in prison, to mend the warders' shoes?"

This has never occurred to Pietromagro, who used to go to prison quite willingly once so as to eat without working. But now he rather takes to the idea; perhaps if he worked he wouldn't feel so ill.

"I can ask. Will you come in on it?"

Yes, Pin will come in on it; working in these circumstances would be something new, something they had thought up for themselves, as amusing as a game. And being in prison wouldn't be too unpleasant, with Pietromagro who wouldn't hit him any more, and singing songs to the prisoners and wardens.

At that moment a warder opens the door, and outside is Red Wolf, who is pointing at Pin and saying: "Yes, that's the one I mean."

The warder calls him out and locks up the cell, leaving Pietromagro all alone inside. Pin cannot understand what they want.



* * *



"Corne along," says Red Wolf, "you must give me a hand with carrying down a barrel of refuse."

Just along the passage, in fact, there stands an iron barrel full of refuse. Pin thinks how cruel it is to make Red Wolf, who is in such a bad state from his beatings, do heavy work with only a child like himself to help him. The barrel is so high it reaches Red Wolf's chest and so heavy it's difficult to lift. While they are trying to lift it Red Wolf brushes Pin's ear with his lips and whispers: "Now keep a sharp look-out, this is our chance," then out loud: "I've been asking for you all round the cells, I need your help."

This is wonderful, Pin thinks, he never dared hope for such a thing. But Pin soon gets attached to places he is in, and even prison, he finds, has its attractions; perhaps he would like to escape with Red Wolf a little later, when he's spent a little time here, but not just when he's arrived.

"I'll do it by myself," says Red Wolf to the warders, who are helping him lift the barrel on his shoulders. "I just need the boy to steady it behind so it doesn't tip over."

They start moving, with Red Wolf bent double under the weight and Pin holding the iron barrel straight by one end.

"D'you know the way?" the warders shout after him. "Careful not to fall down the stairs."

As soon as Red Wolf has turned the first landing he asks Pin to help him rest the barrel on a window-ledge. Is he already tired? No, Red Wolf wants to talk to him. "Now listen carefully. When we reach the lower terrace you're to go ahead and begin talking to the sentry. You must hold his attention so that he doesn't take his eyes off you; you're small and he'll have to keep his head down to talk to you, but don't get too near him, you understand?"

"And what will you do?"

"I'll put a helmet on him. Mussolini's helmet. You'll see. D'you understand what you're to do?"



* * *



"Yes," says Pin, who has not understood anything yet, "and what then?"

"I'll tell you later. Just a moment. Open your hands."

Red Wolf pulls out a piece of soap and rubs it over the palms of Pin's hands, then over his legs, particularly inside the knees.

"Why?" asks Pin.

"You'll see," says Red Wolf, "I've studied my plan in every detail."

Red Wolf belongs to the generation brought up on strip-cartoons; he has taken them all seriously and life has not disproved them so far. Pin helps him lift the barrel back on to his shoulder, then when they reach the terrace, goes on ahead to talk to the sentry.

The sentry is standing by a balustrade, looking sadly over the trees; Pin goes toward him with his hands in his pockets, feeling in his element again; his old spirits of the Alley return.

"Hallo," says he.

"Hallo," says the sentry.

It's a face Pin has never seen before; a sad southerner with cheeks all hacked about from shaving.

"Hell, who do I see?" exclaims Pin. "I was just saying to myself, where's that old bastard got to, when I see you there in front of me."

The sad southerner looks at him, trying to prise open his half-shut lids. "What? Who're you?"

"Hell, you're not going to tell me you don't know my sister?"

The sentry mutters something about not knowing anyone. "Are you a prisoner? I can't talk to prisoners."

And Red Wolf hasn't arrived yet!

"Don't you tell me . . ." says Pin. "You mean to say that since you've been here you've never had a dark girl with frizzy hair?"

The sentry looks perplexed.



* * *



"Yes, as a matter of fact, I have. What about her?"

"A girl who lives in an alley round the corner of the right of a square behind a church then up some steps?"

The sentry blinks. "What?"

Pin is thinking: "It looks as if it'll turn out he really has been with her!"

"I'll just explain," says Pin. "D'you know where the market square is?"

"Mmmm . . ." says the sentry, and begins looking away; it's not working, he must find something more interesting, but if Red Wolf doesn't arrive soon everything will be wasted.

'Wait," says Pin. The sentry turns his eyes back at him for a moment.

"I've got a photograph in my pocket. I'll show it to you in a minute. Only a bit of it, though. Just the head or you won't sleep to-night."

The sentry is now leaning over him, and has even succeeded in completely opening both eyes, the eyes of some cave-dwelling animal. Then finally Red Wolf appears at the entrance to the terrace; although bent double under the barrel of refuse, he is managing to walk on the tips of his toes. Pin pulls both hands out of one of his pockets and waves them in the air, as if he were concealing something: "Ih! Ih. You'd like to see it, eh?"

Red Wolf is drawing nearer, with long silent steps. Then he begins to slide one hand over the other, very slowly. Red Wolf is now right behind the sentry. The sentry is looking at Pin's hands; they are soapy; why? Then all of a sudden a stream of refuse falls on the sentry's head; and not only refuse, but something hard comes crashing down all round him; he's suffocating, he can't free himself; he's caught, and his rifle with him. Then he falls down and feels himself turning and rolling along the terrace.

Meanwhile Red Wolf and Pin have already jumped over the balustrade.



* * *



"There," Red Wolf says to Pin, "hang on there and don't let go," and he points at a drain-pipe. Pin is frightened, but Red Wolf has already almost flung him out into the empty air, and he is forced to grip the drain-pipe. Now he is slithering on his soapy hands and knees; it's rather like sliding down bannisters, only much more frightening; whatever he does he mustn't look down or let go of the drain-pipe.

Red Wolf on the other hand has leapt out into space. Is he trying to kill himself? No, he's trying to reach the branches of a pine-tree not far away, and hang on to them. But the branches break off in his hands and he falls with a crash of twigs and a shower of pine-needles. Pin feels the ground getting nearer beneath him, and is not sure if he is more frightened for himself or for Red Wolf, who might have killed himself. He touches the ground, nearly breaking his legs, and there at the foot of the pine-tree sees Red Wolf lying on the ground under a heap of little branches.

"Wolfy. Are you all right?" he calls.

Red Wolf raises his face, and the bruises from his interrogation are now indistinguishable from those of his fall. He glances around. There is a sound of firing.

"Run for it." says Red Wolf.

He gets up and begins running, with a limp.

"Run for it," he repeats. "This way!"

Red Wolf knows where to go and leads Pin through the abandoned park, full of wild creepers and spiky weeds. Shots are fired at them from the tower, but the park is so thick with trees and bushes that there is cover everywhere. Even so Pin is not quite sure if he has been hit or not, as he knows one doesn't feel a wound at once, then suddenly one drops down dead. Red Wolf leads him through a little gate, behind a greenhouse, then makes him climb a wall.

Suddenly the shadows of the park dissolve, and before them opens a scene in brilliant light and primary colours, like a child's transfer. They have a moment of panic and drop to



* * *



the ground; in front of them stretches a bare hillside, and all round it, vast and calm, the sea.

Then they go into a field of carnations, crawling through them so as not to be seen by women in big straw hats watering among the geometric patterns of grey stalks. Behind a big cement water-tank near a pile of folded mats used to cover the carnations in winter to prevent them freezing, there is a hollow.

"In there," says Red Wolf. They crouch down behind the water-tank and pull the mats round them so that they can't be seen.

"We'll have to wait here till dark," says Red Wolf.

Pin suddenly remembers himself hanging on the drainpipe and the sentries shooting, and goes into a cold sweat. Such things are almost more terrifying to remember than to live through; but one can't feel really frightened with Red Wolf near. It's wonderful to be sitting with him behind the water-tank; like playing hide-and-seek; except that there is no difference between the game and real life, and it has to be played seriously, which Pin likes.

"Are you hurt, Red Wolf?"

"Not much," says Red Wolf, passing a finger wet with saliva over his cuts. "The branches broke my fall when they cracked off. I had it all thought out. How did you get on, with that soap?"

"Bloody hell, Red Wolf, you really are amusing. How d'you know all these things?"

"A Communist must know everything," replies the other. "A Communist must know how to act in all situations."

He's amazing, thinks Pin, a pity he always gives himself such airs.

"There's only one thing I'm sorry about," says Red Wolf. "Being unarmed. I'd give anything for a Sten."

Sten; another mysterious word; Sten, Gap, Sim, how can he ever remember them all? But this last remark of Red



* * *



Wolf's has filled Pin with delight; now he can give himself airs too.

"I'm not worried about that myself," says he, "I've got a pistol and no one else can touch it."

Red Wolf frowns at him, trying not to show too much interest.

"You've got a pistol?"

"Hm, hm," says Pin.

"What calibre? What make?"

"A real pistol. A German sailor's. I stole it from him. That's why I was put inside."

"Tell me what it's like."

Pin tries to explain, and Red Wolf describes every existing type of pistol and decides that Pin's is a P.38. Pin is enthusiastic; pee thirty-eight, what a lovely name, pee thirty-eight!

"Where've you got it?" asks Red Wolf.

"In a certain place," says Pin.

Pin has to decide now whether or not to tell Red Wolf about the spiders' nests. Red Wolf is certainly an amazing fellow who can do all kinds of extraordinary things; but the place where spiders make their nests is a very great secret and must be kept among real close friends. Pin is not sure, in spite of everything, if he really likes Red Wolf; he is too different from all the others, grown-ups and boys too; he is always saying serious things and takes no interest in his sister. But in spite of that, if Red Wolf took an interest in the spiders' nests, Pin would like him very much. Pin, in his heart, cannot understand why all grown-up men concern themselves so much with his sister, who has teeth like a horse and arm-pits full of black hair; but grown-ups never seem to talk to him without making some remark about her, and Pin has become convinced she must be important and that he himself is important because he's the brother of the Dark Girl of Long Alley. But he is sure too that the spiders' nests are more in-



* * *



teresting than his sister and than all this male and female business, though he can never find anyone else who realises it; if he did find someone he would even forgive a lack of concern in the Dark Girl.

"I know a place," he says to Red Wolf, "where spiders make their nests."

"I want to know," replies Red Wolf, "where you've got the P.38."

"Well, it's there," says Pin.

"Describe it to me."

"D'you want to know what spiders' nests are like?"

"I want that pistol."

'Why? It's mine."

"You're only a child, interested in spiders' nests, what can you do with a pistol?"

"It's mine, hell, and if I want to I'll throw it in the river."

"You're a capitalist," says Red Wolf. "Capitalists reason like that."

"Oh, go and hang yourself," says Pin.

Red Wolf says, "You're mad to talk so loud. If they hear us we're done."

He moves away from Red Wolf and they lie there in silence for a time. No, it's hopeless, Pin thinks, Red Wolf has saved him from prison, but they can't ever make friends. But he is frightened of being left alone, and this business of the pistol binds him with a double link to Red Wolf, so he mustn't burn his boats.

Now he sees that Red Wolf has found a piece of charcoal and is beginning to write something on the cement side of the water-tank. Pin also takes up a bit of charcoal and begins drawing dirty pictures; once he had covered all the walls of the Alley with such dirty drawings that the parish priest of San Giuseppe complained to the Comune and made himself a laughing-stock. But Red Wolf is intent on his writing and takes no notice of him.



* * *



"What are you writing?" asks Pin.

"Death to Nazis and Fascists," says Red Wolf. "We mustn't waste our time. Here's a chance to do a little propaganda. Take some charcoal and write too."

"I have," says Pin, and points to his obscene drawings. Red Wolf is furious and begins to rub them out.

"You mad? Fine propaganda that'll make."

"But what's the use of making propaganda here? Who d'you think will come and read anything here except lizards?"

"Shut up. I thought of putting arrows on the water-tank, then on the wall, as far as the road. People will follow the arrows to here and read this."

This is another of the games which only Red Wolf knows how to play; they are very complicated and absorbing games, but they don't make one laugh.

"What shall I write then? 'Long Live Lenin'?"

Years ago in the Alley there had been some writing which appeared continuously on a wall and went: Long Live Lenin. The Fascists came to rub it out and it was back again next day. Then one day they arrested Franse the carpenter and the writing never appeared again. People said Franse had died on an island.

"Write : 'Long Live Italy,' 'Long Live the Allies,' " says Red Wolf.

Pin does not enjoy writing. At school the mistress — how crooked her legs were, seen from under the bench — used to hit him over the fingers. The W for "Long Live" is very difficult to write properly: better find some easier word. Pin thinks a moment, then begins: h-e-l-l.

* * *

The day is beginning to lengthen and dusk never seems to come. Every now and again Red Wolf looks at one of his hands; it acts as a watch; every time he looks at it he sees it getting darker; when he can only see a black shadow it will



* * *



mean that it's dark enough for them to come out. He and Pin have made up their quarrel and Pin has decided that he will take him to the path of the spiders' nests, to dig the pistol up. Red Wolf gets to his feet; it's dark enough now. "Are we going?" asks Pin.

"Wait," says Red Wolf, "I'll go and have a look around and then come back for you. One is less dangerous than two."

Pin doesn't want to stay alone, but he is also afraid of coming into the open without knowing what's there.

"Say, Red Wolf," he exclaims, "you won't just leave me alone here?"

"Trust me," says Red Wolf, "I'll give you my word to come back. Then we'll go and look for the P.38."

Now Pin is all alone, waiting. With Red Wolf no longer there every shadow takes on a strange shape, every noise sounds like a footstep coming nearer. It's the sailor cursing in German at the top of the Alley and now coming to look for him, naked except for his vest, and saying that Pin has also stolen his trousers. It's the baby-faced officer with a police-dog on a lead, whipping it with the belt of the pistol. The face of the police-dog is like that interpreter's with the rat-like moustache. They have got to a chicken-coop and Pin is afraid he is hiding inside there. But they go in, and find the militiaman who took Pin off to prison, crouching down like a chicken, for some unknown reason.

Then Pin thinks that a familiar face is peering into his hiding-place and smiling at him. It's Frenchy Michel! But Michel puts his cap on and his smile changes into a nasty grin; it's the cap of the Black Brigade with the death's head on it! Now Red Wolf is coming at last! But no, a man with a light-coloured raincoat joins Red Wolf, takes him by an elbow and shakes his head, pointing at Pin, with a dissatisfied look; it's Committee! Why doesn't he want Red Wolf to join him? Committee points at the drawings on the water-tank, huge drawings representing Pin's sister in bed with a German.



* * *



Behind the tank there is a heap of manure. Pin had not noticed it before. Now he tries to scoop himself out a hiding-place in the middle of the manure, but as he does so he touches a human face; a man is buried alive in the manure, it's the sentry with the sad face and the cheeks hacked about from shaving!

Suddenly, with a start, Pin wakes up. How long has he been asleep? Around him now it is deep night. Why has Red Wolf not returned yet? Has he met a patrol and been captured? Or can he have returned and called him as he slept and then gone off thinking Pin was no longer there? Or perhaps there was a search for them both going on in the country around, and Red Wolf could not move a step?

Pin comes out from behind the water-tank. The croaking of frogs seems to echo from the great wide throat of the sky, the sea to be a huge shining sword in the depths of the night. Being out in the open gives Pin a strange sense of smallness, not of fear. He is alone now, alone in the whole world. He walks off through the serried rows of carnations and of calendule, then makes for the higher slopes of the hills, to keep above the military area. Later he will come down to the river-bed and the parts which are his own.

He's hungry. The cherries are ripe at this season. Here's a tree, far from any house. Has it grown there by magic? Pin climbs up into the branches and begins to pick the cherries carefully. A big bird takes flight almost in his hands; it was sleeping in the branches. Pin at that moment feels a friend of everything and wishes he had not disturbed it.

When he has taken the edge off his hunger he fills his pockets with cherries and climbs down from the tree, then walks on again spitting out cherry-stones. Then he thinks the Fascists might follow the track of the stones and catch him up. But no one in all the world would be clever enough to think of a thing like that, no one except Red Wolf! He decides to drop a cherry-stone every twenty yards. There, he'll eat a



* * *



cherry the other side of that wall, then another past that old olive-press, and another after the medlar tree; and so on until he reaches the path of the spiders' nests. But long before he has reached the river-bed the cherries are finished. Then Pin realises that Red Wolf will never find him again.

Now he is walking along in the bed of the torrent, which is almost dry, among big white stones and bamboos rustling like paper. Down at the bottom of the wells are sleeping eels as long as human arms, to be caught by hand, sometimes, when drawing water. Where the torrents join in the Old Town, shut up now like a pine-cone, sleep drunken men and women satiated with love-making. Pin's sister is asleep alone or perhaps in company; she has already forgotten him, no longer wonders if he is alive or dead. Lying awake, dying, all alone on the straw of his cell, is Pin's master, Pietromagro, the blood turning yellow with urine in his veins.

Pin has now reached his own part; there is the irrigation channel, there is the path with the nests in it. He recognises the stones, he looks to see if the earth has been disturbed. No, nothing has moved. He scoops with his hands, almost forcing his eagerness; touching the holster gives him a soothing sensation, like a baby feeling a toy under its pillow. He takes the pistol out and passes his finger over the hollows to take the earth out. Out of the barrel, very quickly, jumps a spider; it had made itself a nest inside!

It's lovely, his pistol is, the only thing he has in all the world now. He grasps it and imagines he is Red Wolf, tries to think what Red Wolf would do if he had this pistol in his hand. But that reminds him that he is alone, and that he can't go to anyone for help, neither to those double-faced incomprehensible men at the tavern nor to his traitress of a sister nor even to Pietromagro in prison. He doesn't even know what to do with that pistol, nor how to load it; if he's found with it in his hand they'll certainly kill him. He puts it back in its holster and covers it with stones and earth and grass again. Now



* * *



there is nothing left for him to do but wander aimlessly about the countryside.

He begins walking along the irrigation channels again; in the dark it's easy to lose one's balance on them and put a foot in the water or fall into the strip beneath. Pin concentrates every thought on keeping his balance; it may, he thinks, hold in the tears pressing at the back of his eyes. But the tears well over and cloud his pupils and soak his eyelashes. First they flow silently, then pour down, while sobs hammer at the back of his throat. As he walks along crying like that, a big human shadow comes towards him along the channels. Pin stops, and the man stops too.

"Who goes there?" says the man.

Pin does not know what reply to make, his tears are welling up more than ever and now he's broken into deep, desperate sobbing.

The man comes nearer; he is large and tall, dressed in civilian clothes and armed with a tommy-gun, and has a cloak strapped to his back.

"Hey, why are you crying?" he says.

Pin looks at him; he is a huge man with a flat face like one of those masks which spout water in fountains; he has spreading moustaches and very few teeth.

"What're you doing here, at this time of night?" says the man. "Are you lost?"

The oddest thing about the man is his cap, a woollen one with an embroidered edge and a pom-pom at the top, of some indistinguishable colour.

"You are lost. I can't take you back home, as I've nothing to do with any homes nowadays and can't take lost children back to theirs!"

He says all this almost in a tone of self-justification, more to himself than to Pin.

"I'm not lost," says Pin.



* * *



"Well, what are you doing wandering about here?" says the big man with the woollen cap.

"First you tell me what you're doing."

"Fine," says the man, "you're a bright lad, you are. As you're so bright, why are you crying? I go round at night, killing people. Are you afraid?"

"No. Are you a murderer?"

"There, you see, not even children are afraid any more of men who go around killing people. No, I'm not a murderer, but I kill people all the same."

"Are you going to kill someone now?"

"No. I'm on my way back."

Pin is not frightened of him, for he knows that some men who kill others are good fellows all the same; Red Wolf is always talking about killing and yet he is a good fellow; the painter who lived opposite killed his wife and yet he was a good fellow; Michel the Frenchy has probably killed people by now and yet he will always be the same Frenchy Michel! Then the big man with the woollen cap begins talking about killing, in a sad voice as if he did it as a penance.

"D'you know Red Wolf?" asks Pin.

"Of course I do. Red Wolf is one of Biondo's lot. I'm with Dritto. How d'you know him?"

"I was with him, with Red Wolf, and I've lost him. We escaped from prison. We shoved a barrel over the sentry. First they beat me with the belt of the pistol. I'd stolen it from the sailor who goes with my sister. My sister is the Dark Girl of Long Alley."

The big man with the woollen cap is passing a finger over his moustaches. "Yes . . . yes . . . yes . . . yes . . ." he says, trying to understand the story all at once. "And now where d'you intend going?"

"I don't know," says Pin. "Where are you going?"

"I'm going to the camp."

"Will you take me with you?" says Pin.



* * *



"Come along. Have you had anything to eat?"

"Cherries," says Pin.

"All right. Here's some bread," and he pulls a piece of bread out of his pocket and hands it to Pin.

They set off and walk through an olive-grove. Pin chews the bread; a tear or two is still falling over his cheek and he swallows it with the bread. The big man has taken him by the hand; it's a huge hand, warm and soft, and seems made of bread too.

"Well! now, let's see what happened. . . . Behind it all, you said, there was a woman. . . ."

"My sister. The Dark Girl of Long Alley," says Pin.

"Of course, behind all the stories with a bad ending there's always a woman, make no mistake about that. You're young, just listen to what I tell you. War's all due to women. . . ."

CHAPTER FIVE

Pin awakes to see such bright stretches of sky between branches of woodland trees that it almost hurts him to look up. It is day, a day serene and free, with birds singing.

The big man is standing beside him rolling up the cloak which he has just taken off Pin's back.

"Quick, let's be off, it's day," he says. They had walked almost all night, clambering up through olive-groves, then scrub-land, and eventually into dark pine-woods. They had seen owls, too; but Pin was never afraid because the big man with the little woollen cap always held his hand.

"You're dropping with sleep, sonny," the big man had said, as he pulled him along behind him. "You don't want me to carry you, do you?"



* * *



Pin had in fact had great difficulty in keeping his eyes open, and would have sunk happily into the mass of ferns in the undergrowth till they covered him right over. It had been almost morning when they reached the open space near a charcoal burner's hut and the big man said, "We can halt here."

Pin had stretched out on the mossy ground, and watched, as if in a dream, the big man cover him with his cloak, then go to and fro with bits of wood, break them up, and light a fire.

Now it is day, and the big man is making water on the embers of the fire; Pin gets up and does the same beside him. Standing there he looks up at the big man's face; he has not yet seen it properly in the light. As the shadows melt away in the woods and from his eyes still gluey with sleep, Pin keeps on making new discoveries about him. He's younger than he'd seemed and his proportions more normal; his moustache is reddish-colour and he has blue eyes, gaps in his teeth and a flattened nose running across his face.

"We'll soon be there now," he says to Pin now and again, as they walk on through the woods. He does not talk much and Pin enjoys walking beside him in silence; he is a little frightened, in his heart, of this man who goes round alone at night killing people, and then is so good and protective with him. Pin has always been embarrassed by good people; he does not know how to treat them and always longs to make fun of them and see how they react. But he feels different with the big man with the woollen cap, for he's a person who has done a lot of killing and can allow himself to be good without regrets.

The big man talks about nothing but how endless the war is and how after seven years with the Alpine troops he still has to go round with a gun and how the only people who are well-off these days are the women and how he'd been round every country and realised that women everywhere are all thoroughly bad lots. Most of this does not interest Pin, it's



* * *



the sort of thing everyone says these days; but he has never heard anyone talk like that about women before, and thinking it over he finds he agrees with the big man. It's not as if this man is like Red Wolf who just isn't interested in women; he seems to know them well, but has realised what Pin has always realised; that they're a foul lot and that it's impossible to understand what pleasure men get from being with them.

Now they have left the pines behind and are walking through chestnut woods.

"Very soon now," says the big man, "we really will be there."

And just after that they meet a mule, with no other harness but a bridle, wandering about on its own, munching leaves.

"That's not the way to let a mule out, loose like that," says the man. "Here, Corsair, here my pretty."

He takes it by the bridle and draws it along behind him. Corsair is a mangy old mule, docile and submissive. Meanwhile they have reached a clearing in the woods, with a hut in it for smoking chestnuts. There is not a soul to be seen. The man stops and so does Pin.

"What's up?" exclaims the man. "Have they all left?"

Pin realises that perhaps he ought to feel frightened, but he does not know how things are and so feels no fear.

"Hey! Who goes there!" says the man, not very loud, and slipping the tommy-gun from his shoulder.

Then from the hut appears a little man with a sack on his shoulder. He sees them, throws the sack down on the ground and begins clapping his hands. "Hallo! Hey! Cousin! It's music day to-day!" he exclaims in a cackling voice.

"Mancino!" exclaims Pin's companion. 'Where the hell are the others?"

The little man comes toward them, rubbing his hands.

"Three trucks, three loaded trucks, driving up the main road. They were seen this morning and the whole battalion



* * *



has gone out to attack them. Soon the music'll begin."

He is a tiny little man, dressed in a big sailor's jersey and with a cap made of rabbit fur on his bald head. Pin thinks he must be a gnome living in this hut in the middle of the woods.

The big man passes a finger over his moustache. "Good," he says, "I must go down and have a shot too."

"If you're still in time," says the little man. "I've stayed behind to get the food ready. I'm sure they'll have already put 'em out of action by midday and are now on their way back."

"You might have looked after the mule too, as you were here," says the other. "If I hadn't come across it, it'd have ended on the seashore."

The little man ties up the mule, then looks at Pin.

"And who's this? Have you had a son, Cousin?"

"I'd cut my soul out rather than have a son," says the big man. "This lad has been in action with Red Wolf and got lost."

That is not exactly the way it was, but Pin is pleased to be introduced in such a way and perhaps the big man said it on purpose to show him in a good light.

"Here, Pin," says the big man, "this is Mancino, the cook of the detachment. You must treat him with respect, as he's old, and if you don't he won't give you a full ration."

"Listen, my little recruit of the revolution," says Mancino, "d'you know how to peel potatoes?"

Pin would like to bring out some obscenity in reply, just to make friends, but he cannot think of a suitable one on the spur of the moment, and answers: "Yes, I do."

"Good, I need an assistant cook," says Mancino. 'Wait and I'll go and fetch the knives," and he vanishes into the hut.

"Hey, is he your cousin?" Pin asks the big man.

"No, everyone calls me Cousin."

"Me too?"



* * *



"You too what?"

"Can call you Cousin?"

"Of course; it's a name like any other."

Pin likes this. He tries it out at once. "Cousin!" he calls.

"What d'you want?"

"Cousin, what are the trucks coming up for?"

"To hunt for us, that's what they're coming for. But we'll go out and hunt them. That's life."

"Are you going too, Cousin?"

"Of course, I must go."

"Aren't you tired of walking?"

"I've been walking and sleeping with my boots on for the last seven years. When I die, it'll be with my boots on."

"Seven years without taking your boots off. God, Cousin, how your feet must stink."

Meanwhile Mancino has returned. But he is not only carrying the knives for the potatoes. On his shoulder is perched a large ugly bird, chained by a claw like a parrot, and fluttering its clipped wings.

"What is it? What is it?" exclaims Pin, who has already put a finger under its beak. The bird rolls its yellow eyes and nearly pecks him.

"Ah! Ah!" grins Mancino. "He'll have your finger off in a second! Be careful. Babeuf's a spiteful old hawk!"

"Where did you get him, Mancino?" asks Pin, who is learning more and more not to trust either grown-ups or their pets.

"Babeuf is a veteran partisan. I got him from his nest when he was tiny; now he's the mascot of the unit."

"You'd have done better to let him free as a bird of prey," says Cousin. "He's a mascot that brings worse luck than a priest."

But Mancino has put a hand to his ear and signed to them to be quiet.

"Did you hear that? Ta . . . Tata ... ?"



* * *



They listen. Firing can be heard from down the valley. Bursts, ta . . . pum, and an occasional boom of hand grenades.

Mancino bangs a fist against his palm, with that harsh little laugh of his: "We're at it! We're at it! I say we'll wipe the lot up. We'll crack their heads open one by one."

"Well, we won't crack much if we stay here. I'm going to have a look," says Cousin.

"Wait a bit," says Mancino, "eat a few chestnuts first. There were some left over this morning. Giglia!"

Cousin raises his head with a jerk. "Who are you calling?" he asks.

"My wife," says Mancino, "she arrived last night. The Black Brigade were hunting for her down in the town."

A woman has now appeared on the threshold of the hut; she has peroxided hair and is still young, though a little overblown. Pin thinks: one would never guess Mancino was a type to have such a young wife, so refined-looking too.

Cousin is frowning and smoothing his moustache with a finger.

"Hallo, Cousin," calls the woman, "I'm a refugee up here," and she saunters towards him with her hands in her pockets; she's wearing long trousers and a man's shirt.

Cousin gives Pin a glance. Pin understands it; even up here one can't be free of these cursed women; things will end badly if they begin coming. Pin is proud to share secrets with Cousin, secrets about women, exchanged by glances.

"You've brought good weather with you," says Cousin rather sourly, looking away and pointing towards the valley, from which firing can still be heard.

"What weather could be better than this!" exclaims Mancino. "Just listen to the heavy! Listen to the row it's making! Giglia, give him a handful of chestnuts as he wants to go down."

Giglia looks at Cousin with a strange smile. Pin notices



* * *



that her eyes are green and her neck ripples like the back of a cat.

"There's no time," says Cousin, "I must go. Get the food ready. Good luck, Pin."

And off he goes, with the rolled cloak strapped to his back and the tommy-gun still in his hands.

Pin would like to run after Cousin and stay with him, but he is aching all over, and also he finds the firing down in the valley makes him vaguely apprehensive. It would also be nice to stay up here with these two. Pin wishes they really were a gnome and his wife living alone in the middle of the wood and that he was their adopted son and talked to the fairies. But the little man in the sailor's jersey has a malicious back-biting air, like the dismal evil-looking hawk he carries on his shoulder, and the little man's wife has a way of smiling to herself which the husband does not even notice. Pin would like to say to him, "Take care, Mancino. Bloody hell, if I were you I wouldn't trust that woman too much."

"And who are you, baby?" says Giglia, passing a hand over his thatch of scruffy hair, though Pin draws his head away as he has never been able to stand women's caresses; also he doesn't like being called "baby."

"Your little son! Don't you recognise me?"

"A good answer! A good answer!" croaks Mancino, rubbing the knives against each other and driving the hawk into a frenzy. "One should never ask a partisan who he is. The reply is 'I'm a son of the proletariat, my country is the International, my sister is the Revolution.' "

Pin winks, and looks at him out of the corner of his eye: "What's that? You know my sister too?"

"Don't take any notice of him," says Giglia. "He has bored everyone with his talk about perpetual revolution, even the commissars are against him. A Trotskyist, that's what they call him, a Trotskyist!"



* * *



Trotskyist; another new word!

"What does it mean?" he asks.

"I'm not sure what it means myself," says Giglia, "but it's a word that suits him: Trotskyist!"

"Stupid fool!" Mancino shouts at her. "I'm not a Trotskyist! If you've come up here to annoy me, you can go straight back to the town and get yourself captured by the Black Brigade!"

"Selfish swine!" replies Giglia. "It's your fault . . ."

"Stop," says Mancino, "let me listen. Why isn't the heavy firing any more?"

In fact the heavy, which has been firing continuous bursts up till now, has suddenly stopped.

Mancino gives his wife a worried look: 'What can have happened? Has the ammunition given out?"

". . . or the machine-gunner been killed . . ." says Giglia apprehensively. They both stand there listening in-tendy, then look at each other again and the spite comes back into their faces.

'Well?" says Mancino.

"I was just saying," Giglia begins shouting again, "that it's your fault I've had to live with my heart in my mouth for the last two months, and you still don't want me up here."

"Bitch!" says Mancino, "bitch! One of the reasons I came up here was . . . There! It's started again!"

The heavy is firing again; short bursts, with long pauses in between.

"That's better," says Giglia.

". . . one of the reasons I came up here was," shouts the other, "that I couldn't stand living with you any longer, after all I saw you getting up to!"

"Oh yes? Then what about after the war's over and the merchant-ships sail again and you'll only see me two or three times a year? . . . Hey, what are those shots?"

Mancino listens, worried: "They sound like mortars . . ."



* * *



"Ours or theirs?"

"Let me listen. There's one firing. It's theirs!"

"It's not firing. It's exploding, farther down the valley.

Its ours . . ."

"Always contradicting! Curse the day I met you! Yes,

they really are ours ... all the better, Giglia, all the bet-

ter . . ."

"I told you so. A Trotskyism that's what you are; a Trotskyist!"

Pin is thoroughly enjoying himself; he feels at home. In the Alley there were quarrels between husbands and wives that lasted for whole days, and he used to spend hours under their windows listening to them without missing a single word, as if they were on the wireless; and every now and again he would intervene with some comment of his own, shouted at the top of his voice, so that the litigants would sometimes break off, then both appear at the window-sill to swear at him.

It's all much better up here; in the middle of woods, to the accompaniment of firing, and with all these new colourful words.

Then suddenly everything is calm; the battle seems to have died down; and the husband and wife are staring furiously at each other, without a breath left in their throats.

"Hell, you aren't giving up so soon?" asks Pin. "Have you lost the thread?"

They both look at Pin, then at each other to see which is going to speak, so as to contradict at once.

"They're singing!" exclaims Pin. Now from down in the valley comes the faint echo of a song.

"In German . . ." mutters the cook.

"Idiot!" shouts the woman. "Can't you hear it's Bandiera Rossa?"

"Bandiera Rossa?" the little man claps his hands and gives a twirl in the air, while the hawk tries to fly above his head



* * *



with its clipped wings. "Yes; it's Bandiera Rossa."

He begins running down the slope, singing: "Bandiera Rossa trionferà,"1 until he gets to the edge of a bluff, where he stops and listens.

"Yes. It's Bandiera Rossa!"

He comes running back with shouts of delight, the hawk planing behind him on its chain like an eagle. He kisses his wife, claps Pin on the shoulder, and all three take hands and sing: "Bandiera Rossa trionferà."

"You see," Mancino says to Pin, "you mustn't get the idea that we were having a serious quarrel; it was all joking."

"Really," says Giglia, "my husband is a bit silly but he's the best husband in the world."

So saying she raises his rabbit-fur cap and kisses him on his bald pate. Pin cannot tell if they are lying or not, grownups are always so double-faced, but anyway he has enjoyed himself very much.

"Let's get down to peeling the potatoes," says Mancino, "they'll be back in a couple of hours and won't find anything ready."

They turn out the sack of potatoes and sit round peeling them and throwing them in a pail. The potatoes are cold and freeze Pin's fingers, but it's pleasant to be peeling potatoes in the company of this strange little gnome who might be good or bad, and of his wife who is even more incomprehensible. But Giglia soon stops peeling and begins combing her hair. This annoys Pin who does not like working with someone lazing in front of him. But Mancino goes on peeling the potatoes; perhaps he's used to this, it's what always happens with them.

"What's there to eat to-day?" asks Pin.

"Goat's meat and potatoes," replies Mancino, "d'you like goat's meat and potatoes?"

1 Lit. "The Red Flag will triumph." This is an Italian Partisan song, and nothing to do with the old "Red Flag."



* * *



All Pin knows is that he's hungry, and he says yes.

"You cook well, do you, Mancino?" he asks.

"Hell," says Mancino, "it's my job. Twenty years, I've spent, cooking on ships; ships of every kind and every nationality."

"Pirate ships too?" asks Pin.

"Yes, pirate ships too."

"Chinese ships too?"

"Chinese ships too."

"Can you speak Chinese?"

"I can speak every language under the sun. And I know how they cook in every country under the sun; Chinese cooking, Mexican cooking, Turkish cooking . . ."

"How are you cooking the goat's meat and potatoes today?"

"As the Eskimos do. D'you like the way the Eskimos do?"

"Hell, Mancino, as the Eskimos do it! Tell me, what else have you seen?"

"Where?"

"There. Where you've been in those ships."

Pin now sees that Mancino has a drawing of a butterfly on the skin of one of his ankles, showing below his ragged trousers.

"What's that?" he asks.

"A tattoo," says Mancino.

"What's it for?"

"You ask too many questions."

* * *

When the first men arrive the water is just on the boil.

Pin has always wanted to set eyes on partisans. Now he is standing open-mouthed in the middle of the clearing in front of the hut, and no sooner has he begun staring at one of them than another two or three arrive, all looking different and all hung with weapons and machine-gun belts.





* * *



They might also be soldiers, a company of soldiers who had disappeared during a war many years ago and been wandering in the forests ever since without finding their way back, their uniforms in rags, their boots falling to pieces, and their beards all matted, carrying weapons which now they only use to kill wild animals.

They are tired and coated all over with sweat and dust. Pin had expected them to arrive singing; instead of which they are looking grim and serious, and throw themselves on the ground in silence.

Mancino is skipping round them like a dog, clapping his hands, and giving great hoots of laughter: "We've given 'em a good hiding this time! How did we do it? Tell me about it."

The men shake their heads; they are lying about on the straw and not speaking. Why are they so discontented? They look as if they'd returned from a defeat.

"Well? Did things go badly? Have we had many killed?" Mancino goes round saying from one to the other, without succeeding in getting a word from any of them.

Now Dritto, the commander, arrives. He is a thin young man, with eyes framed in long black lashes and curious movements of the nostrils. He goes round swearing at the men and complaining because the food is not ready.

"Come on now; what's happened?" insists the cook. "Didn't we win? If you don't tell me I won't do any more cooking."

"Yes, yes, of course we won," says Dritto, "two trucks captured, twenty Germans killed; a good haul."

He says this in a tone of irritation, as if he were being forced to admit it.

"Then did we have lots of killed too?"

"Two wounded in the other detachment. We're all intact, of course."

Mancino looks at him; he is beginning to understand.

"Don't you realise they sent us over to the other side of



* * *



the valley," shouts Dritto, "so we couldn't fire a shot! They'll have to make up their minds at Brigade; either not to trust the detachment and break it up; or to consider us partisans like all the others and send us into action. Another time if we're just put on rearguard duties we won't move. And I'll resign. Anyway I'm ill." He spits and goes into the hut.

Cousin has now arrived and calls Pin.

"Pin, d'you want to see the battalion passing? Go down there, you can see the road from the edge of the ridge."

Pin plunges down through the thickets and out on the other side. Below him he sees the road, with a line of men walking along it. They look different from the others he has seen till now; brightly coloured, gleaming, bearded men, armed to the teeth, wearing the strangest uniforms; wide hats, helmets, leather jackets, bare chests, red scarves, Fascist tunics; and all their weapons are different and all of them unknown to Pin. Some pale glum prisoners also pass. Pin thinks all this is too good to be true, that it must all be due to the sun reflecting on the dusty road.

Suddenly he gives a start; he's seen a face he knows. There's no doubt of it; Red Wolf. He calls him and they soon join each other. Red Wolf has a German weapon on his shoulder and is limping on a swollen ankle. He is still wearing his Russian cap, but now it has a star on it, a red star with a white and green circle inside it.

"Fine," he calls to Pin, "you've got here by yourself; you're a bright lad."

"God, Red Wolf," says Pin, "how on earth did you get here? I waited so long for you."

'Well, you see, when I left you I thought I'd have a look at the place the Germans park their vehicles near there. I got into a garden nearby and from a terrace I saw soldiers fully equipped and getting ready to move. I said to myself, they must be mounting an attack on us: if they're getting ready now, they'll be up our way by dawn. So I ran all the way up



* * *



here to warn them, and everything's gone all right. But I twisted my ankle, the one that was so swollen when I fell that time, and now I'm lame."

"You're amazing, Red Wolf, you really are," says Pin, "but you're a swine all the same to leave me when you'd given me your word of honour."

"Honour," he says, "is due to the Cause first."

Meanwhile they have reached Dritto's camp. Red Wolf looks all the men up and down and replies coldly to their greetings.

"You've got into fine company," says he.

"Why?" asks Pin, a little bitterly; he has grown fond of these people already and does not want Red Wolf to come and take him away again.

Red Wolf whispers in his ear. "Don't tell anyone; but this is what I've heard. They send the duds to Dritto's detachment, the cast-offs from the brigade. They may keep you here, because you're a child. But if you like I can try and get you moved."

Pin does not like the idea of being kept here because he's a child; but the men he knows are not duds.

"Tell me, Red Wolf, is Cousin a dud?"

"Cousin is a man who has to be left on his own. He always goes round alone and is a good man and has guts."

Pin would like to ask Red Wolf lots of other questions: "What about Mancino? Is it true he's a Trotskyist?"

Perhaps, thinks Pin, he'll explain what that means.

"He's a Trotskyist, he's an extremist, the commissar of the brigade told me so. You don't agree with him, do you?"

"No, no," replies Pin. Who knows? Perhaps Trotskyist means something degrading.

"Comrade Red Wolf," exclaims Mancino, coming up with his hawk on his shoulder. "We'll make you Commissar of the Soviet of the Old Town!"

Red Wolf does not even look him in the face. "Left-wing Communism, an infantile disorder," he says to Pin.



* * *



CHAPTER SIX

Under the trees of the wood the ground is thick with chestnut husks and dry pools full of hard leaves. In the evenings layers of mist spread between the trunks of the chestnut trees and shroud their bases, covered with the reddish sheen of moss and the bluish marks of lichen. The encampment can be sensed before it is reached, from the smoke rising above the tree-tops and the faint singing of a chorus, growing louder as one goes deeper into the woods. The hut is made of stone, two stories high, the lower story on the ground floor for animals, and the one above, made of logs, for shepherds to sleep in.

Now there are men above and below, sleeping on piles of fresh bracken and hay; as there are no windows through which the smoke of the fire on the ground floor can escape, it curls round under the slate roof and burns the eyes and throats of the men lying below. Every night the men crouch round the fire, lit under cover in case it is seen by the enemy, and crowd up together, with Pin in the midst of them, lit by flickering flames and singing away at the top of his voice as he used to in the tavern in the Alley. The men look rather like the men of the tavern too, sitting there with hard eyes and splaying elbows, though they are not gazing resignedly into purple glasses; their hands are on the barrels of their weapons and to-morrow they will be going out to fire them against other men; against the enemy!

It is this that makes them different from others, this that gives Pin a feeling new to him, that he has never felt before; it's their having enemies. In the Alley there was shouting and rowing and insulting between men and women going on night and day, but there was never this bitter longing to meet the enemy, a longing which keeps these men awake at night. Pin does not yet realise what it means, to have enemies. To



* * *



Pin there's something as disgusting as worms about all human beings; and something good and warm, too, which draws him to their company.

But these men can think of nothing but the enemy; they're like lovers; when they say certain words their beards quiver, their eyes glisten, and their hands stroke the barrels of their rifles. They do not ask Pin to sing songs about love or comic songs that make them laugh; what they want are songs full of bloodshed and violence, or others so obscene that they have to be shouted out with hatred. Yes, these men fill Pin with more admiration than any others ever have.

Below the hut the woods straggle off into strips of meadow, and there, it is said, spies are buried; Pin is a little afraid of passing that way at night, in case he feels a tug at his heels from hands growing up through the grass.

Pin is now accepted as one of the band; he is in everyone's confidence and knows the right phrase to make fun of each man, or cheer him up, or make him lash out.

"Hell, chief" he says to Dritto, "they say you've got your uniform all ready for when you go down below, with badges of rank, spurs and sword."

Although Pin jokes with the leaders, he always tries to keep on the right side of them, for he likes to be in with them in case he can get off guard duty or some other job.

Dritto is the son of emigrants from Southern Italy; he has the smile of a sick man, and lids always lowered over his long lashes. He is a waiter by profession; not a bad profession as one lives with the rich and only works alternate seasons; but he would much prefer to lie in the sun all the year round, with his thin muscular arms behind his head. Instead of which there is some demon in him which keeps him perpetually on the move and makes his nostrils quiver like antennae and gives him a subtle pleasure in handling weapons. They are doubtful about him at brigade headquarters as he has had unfavourable reports from the Committee, for he always



* * *



wants to act on his own and is too fond of giving orders and not fond enough of setting an example. But he can be brave when he wants to be and there are not many men capable of leadership available; so he has been given this detachment, which is considered unreliable, and useful mainly to dump men who might harm others. Dritto is offended about this and inclined to play up to brigade headquarters; every now and again he says he is ill and spends entire days lying on the bracken in the hut, with his arms behind his head and his long lashes lowered over his eyes.

The detachment needs a good commissar to keep its leader on the right lines; but the commissar, Giacinto, is perpetually tortured by lice, which he has allowed to spread all over him and which he can no longer hold in check, so that he is beyond exercising any authority either over the commander or the men. Every now and again he is called to battalion or brigade headquarters to report on the situation and discuss means of dealing with it; but it is all wasted breath, for as soon as he gets back he starts scratching again from morning till night, and pretends not to notice what the commander is doing or what the men are saying about him.

Dritto takes Pin's jokes with a quiver of the nostrils and that sick smile of his, and says Pin is the best man in the detachment and that as he himself is ill and wants to resign they might as well put Pin in command, for things are bound to go wrong anyway. Then the men all turn on Pin and ask him when he is coming into action with them and if he can aim and fire at a German. This makes Pin angry, for in his heart he knows he would be frightened to be in the middle of shooting and is not even sure if he would be capable of firing at a man. But when they say that sort of thing to him he tries to convince himself that he is like them, and begins describing what he will do when he's allowed to go into battle, holding his fists under his eyes as if he were firing a machine-gun.



* * *



This excites Kim; he thinks of the Fascists and when they beat him and of these bluish and hairless faces at the interrogation; ta-tatata, they're all dead, chewing the carpet under the German officer's desk, with bleeding gums. He too feels that sharp rasping urge to kill, even to kill the militiaman hiding in the chicken-coop, stupid though he is, perhaps just because he is stupid, to kill the gloomy sentry at the prison too, gloomy though he is, just because he is gloomy and his face is all hacked about from shaving. The urge is remote, vague, like the urge to love; it has an exciting and unpleasant taste like cigarettes or wine.

"If I was a boy like you," says Long Zena, "I'd nip straight down into town, shoot an officer, then escape up here again. No one would take any notice of a boy like you and you could get right under their noses. It would be easy for you to escape, too."

Pin gets furious; he knows they say these things to make fun of him, and then won't give him any weapon or let him leave the camp.

"Send me," he says, "and I'll go, you see."

"All right, go to-morrow," they say.

"How much d'you bet that I'll go down and do in an officer, one day?"

"Come on, Dritto," says the others, "you'll give him a weapon, won't you?"

"Pin is assistant-cook," says Dritto, "his weapons are a knife for the potatoes and a ladle."

"To hell with all your weapons! Why, I've got a German naval pistol that's better than any of yours!"

"Really!" say the others. "And where d'you keep it, at home? A naval pistol; it must be one of those water ones."

Pin chews his lips; one day he'll go down and dig up the pistol, and do wonderful things with it that will astonish them all.

"What d'you bet I've got a P.38 hidden?"



* * *



"D'you think you re a partisan, keeping arms hidden? Describe the place and we'll go and fetch it."

"No, it's a place no one knows but me, and I won't tell anyone."

"Why not?"

"Spiders make their nests there."

"Oh, go on with you. Spiders never make nests. They're not swallows."

"If you don't believe me, then give me one of your weapons."

"We got our weapons for ourselves. We con-quer-ed them!"

"Hell, I conquered mine too. In my sister's room, while the other one . . ."

The others laugh, they don't understand what he is talking about. Pin feels like going off with his pistol and being a partisan all on his own.

"What d'you bet I'll find your pistol for you, your P.38?"

The question is asked by a slim youth with a perpetual cold, the shadow of a moustache, and froth congealed on his lips, called Pelle. He is polishing the bolt on a gun, with a rag, very carefully.

"I'll bet your blasted uncle you'll never find the place where spiders make their nests," says Pin.

Pelle stops rubbing a second. "Silly, I know that riverbed inch by inch, you can't even guess the number of girls I've had on those banks."

Pelle's two passions are weapons and women. He won Pin's admiration by his knowing talk about the qualities of all the prostitutes in the town and by saying things about Pin's sister that suggested he knew her well too. Pin feels a mixture of attraction and repulsion for him, so thin, with that perpetual cold of his, forever telling stories about girls he has tricked into going out into the fields and then had there, or about the new complicated weapons issued to the Black



* * *



Brigade. Pelle is young but has been all over Italy camping with the Young Fascists, and he has always handled weapons and visited brothels, even before reaching the prescribed age.

"No one knows where the spiders' nests are except me," says Pin.

Pelle laughs, showing his gums. "I know," he says, "I'm going down into town now to get a tommy-gun from a Fascist's house, and I'll look for your pistol too."

Pelle goes down into the town every now and again and returns loaded up with weapons; he always seems to know where there are hidden weapons and who has them, and risks capture every time in order to increase his armoury. Pin is uncertain if Pelle is telling the truth; perhaps Pelle is the great friend he has been seeking for so long, who knows all about women and pistols and spiders' nests too; but those reddish, cold-ridden eyes of his are frightening.

"And will you bring me it, if you find it?" asks Pin.

Pelle's grin is all gums: "If I find it, I'll keep it for myself."

It is difficult to get Pelle to give up any weapons; every day there are rows at the detachment about Pelle not being a good comrade and pretending to have owners' rights over all the weapons he's acquired. He had joined the Black Brigade before going into the partisans, so as to have a tommy-gun, and had gone round the town at night shooting at cats. Then he had deserted from the Black Brigade after emptying half their armoury; since then he had always gone back to the town at regular intervals and found strange new automatic weapons and grenades and pistols there. He often talks about the Black Brigade, painting it in diabolic colours, but always with a certain fascination. "At the Brigade they say this . . . they do that. . . ."

"All right, Dritto, I'm off, as we agreed," says Pelle now, licking his lip and giving little sniffs.

The men are not supposed to go and come on their own



* * *



as they feel like it, but Pelle's expeditions are always fruitful; he never returns empty-handed.

"I'll let you go for two days," says Dritto, "not more, d'you see? And don't do anything silly and get yourself captured."

Pelle goes on licking his lips. "I'll take the new Sten," he says.

"No," says Dritto, "take the old Sten. We need the new one."

The usual question.

"The new Sten's mine," says Pelle, "I brought it here and I'll take it when I like."

When Pelle grows quarrelsome his eyes get redder still as if he were about to burst into tears and his voice becomes even more nasal and stuffed-up. Dritto, on the other hand, is cold and inflexible, and gives only a quiver of the nostrils before opening his mouth.

"In that case you don't move," he says.

Pelle begins a long complaint, boasting of his own merits and saying that if that's the way he's treated he'll leave the detachment and take all his weapons with him. Suddenly Dritto gives him a sharp slap on the face. "You do just what I tell you, see?"

The others look on, approvingly; they have no more liking for Dritto than for Pelle, but are pleased to see their commander make himself respected.

Pelle stands there with his nose in the air and the red marks of fingers showing on his pale cheek.

"You'll pay for this," he says. Then he turns and leaves.

It is misty outside. The men shrug their shoulders. Pelle has made scenes like that before and has always returned with another haul. Pin runs after him. "Say, Pelle, my pistol, listen, that pistol . . ." he calls, not quite knowing what he wants to ask him. But Pelle has vanished and Pin's shouts are muffled in the mist. He returns among the others, who have straw in their hair and sour looks.



* * *



To liven up the atmosphere and get his own back for the way they made fun of him Pin begins jeering at those least able to defend themselves and who can most easily be laughed at. He settles on four Calabrians nicknamed Duke, Marquis, Count and Baron. They are brothers-in-law, who left their own parts to come and marry four sisters from Calabria, emigrated up here; they make a group on their own, under the leadership of Duke, who is the oldest and can get himself respected.

Duke wears a round fur cap pulled down over one eye, and has straight moustaches on a square proud face. In his belt is a big Austrian pistol; this he pulls out and thrusts in the stomach of anyone who contradicts him, grunting some truculent phrase in his angry-sounding dialect, full of repetitions and strange dissonances: "I'll bbblow your bbbrains out!"

Pin copies him. Then Duke, who cannot stand being jeered at, runs after him waving the Austrian pistol and shouting: "I'll bbblow your bbbrains out!"

But Pin is taking the risk because he knows that the others are on his side and that it amuses them to make fun of the Calabrians; Marquis with a face like a sponge and hair low on his forehead; Count, dark and gloomy as a mulatto, and Baron, the youngest, with a big peasant's hat, a swivel eye and a medal of the Virgin hanging from a button-hole. Duke's job had been slaughtering for the black market and whenever there is an animal to cut up he asks to do it; there is some dark blood-cult in him. Often they go off, all four of them, down towards the valley and the carnation plantations where the sisters, their wives, live. And there they have mysterious duels with the Black Brigade, ambushes and vendettas, as if they were waging, on their own, a war caused by ancient family feuds.

Sometimes, at night, Pin is told to be quiet by Long Zena, who has reached a good part in his book and wants



* * *



to read it out loud. Long Zena spends entire days without leaving the hut, lying stretched out on the dirty straw, reading a big book called Super-Thriller, by the light of a little oil-lamp. He has even been known to take the book into action with him and go on reading it, leaning on the magazine of the machine-gun, while waiting for the Germans to appear.

He reads out loud in a monotonous Genoese cadence; it's a story about men disappearing in the mysterious Chinese quarters of an American port. Dritto likes hearing him read and tells the others to keep quiet; Dritto has never in his life had the patience to read a book through, but once, when he was in prison, he had spent hours and hours listening to an old convict reading The Count of Monte Cristo out loud and had enjoyed that very much.

But Pin cannot understand the pleasure of reading and is getting bored. He says: "Hey, Long Zena, what will your wife say that night?"

"Which night?" asks Long Zena, who is not yet used to Pin's jokes.

"The first night you go to bed with her and spend the whole time reading!"

"Porcupine-face!" exclaims Long Zena.

"Bull-face!" replies Pin. The Genoese has a long pale face with two enormous lips and slanting eyes under the peak of a leather cap that's so stiff it might be made of wood. Long Zena gets angry and starts getting up. "Why bull-face? Why d'you call me bull-face?"

"Bull-face!" repeats Pin again and again, keeping out of range of his huge hands.

Pin feels he can risk this as he knows that the Genoese will never make the effort to run after him, and will always decide after a bit to let Pin go on talking, and start reading again from where his big finger is holding the place. He is the laziest man in the whole brigade; though his shoulders are like a stevedore's he always has some excuse, on marches,



* * *



to avoid carrying a load. One by one all the detachments had got rid of him until he's ended up in Dritto's.

"How cruel it is," says Long Zena, "that men have to work all their lives."

But there are countries, such as America, where men can get rich without much effort; Long Zena will go off there as soon as the boats begin sailing again.

"Free enterprise, the secret of everything is free enterprise," says he, stretching his long arms lying on the straw, and following again, with a finger, the book describing life in that free happy country.

At night, when everyone is asleep in the straw, Long Zena folds back the page he has begun, shuts the book, blows out the oil-lamp and goes off to sleep with his cheek resting on the cover.

CHAPTER SEVEN

The dreams of the partisans are short and rare, dreams born of nights of hunger, linked to food which is always scarce and always to be divided among so many; dreams about chewing bits of bread and putting them away in drawers. Stray dogs must have dreams like that, about gnawing bones and burying them. Only when the men's stomachs are full, when the fire is lit, and there has not been too much marching the day before, can they dream of women and wake up in the morning with spirits free and soaring, gay as if anchors have been drawn.

Then the men lying in the straw begin to talk about their women, about those in the past and those in the future, to make plans for when the war is over, and to pass each other faded yellow photographs.

Giglia sleeps by the wall, the other side of her dumpy



* * *



little bald husband. In the morning she listens to the men talking with so much yearning, and feels their glances slithering towards her like snakes in the straw. Then she gets up and goes out to the spring to wash herself. The men remain in the darkness of the hut, thinking of her opening her shirt and soaping her breasts. Dritto, who has always been silent, gets up and goes out to wash too. The men laugh at Pin for reading their thoughts.

Pin feels among them as he felt among the men in the tavern, only this world is more brightly coloured, more savage, with these nights in the hay and these beards crawling with lice. There is something else which attracts and frightens Pin, apart from that absurd fixation about women which is common to all grown-ups; every now and again they return to the hut leading some yellow-faced man whom Pin has not seen before, and who looks around as if incapable of shutting his staring eyes or of unlocking his jaws to ask something he longs to know.

The man goes docilely out with them, into the misty terraced meadows that lie at the edge of the woods; no one ever sees him return, and sometimes his hat or jacket or nailed boots appear on someone else. Pin finds this fascinating and mysterious, and he tries every time to join the little group of men walking off into the fields; but they push him away with curses, and Pin is left jumping about in front of the hut and poking a broom at the hawk, thinking meanwhile of the secret rites taking place in the misty damp grass.

* * *

One day Duke returns to the camp after having gone off with his three brothers-in-law on one of those mysterious expeditions of theirs. He arrives wearing a black woollen scarf round his neck and carrying his fur cap in his hand.

"Comrades," he says, "they've killed my brother-in-law Marquis."



* * *



The men come out of the hut and watch Count and Baron arriving, also wearing black woollen scarves round their necks, and carrying a stretcher made of vine poles and olive branches on which is lying the body of Marquis, killed by the Black Brigade in a field of carnations.

The brothers-in-law put the stretcher down in front of the hut and stand round it with their heads bare and their chins lowered. Then they notice the two prisoners. These are Fascist prisoners captured in an action the day before, who are standing there peeling potatoes, with feet bare and torn uniforms where the badges had been ripped off, explaining for the hundredth time to anyone near them that they had only joined the Black Brigade because they were forced to.

Duke orders the two prisoners to take picks and spades, and carry the stretcher to the meadows, to bury their brother-in-law's body. They set off; the two Fascists carrying on their shoulders the stretcher of branches with the corpse on it, followed by the three brothers-in-law, Duke in the middle with the other two on each side of him. They are holding their caps in their left hands at the level of their hearts; Duke his round fur cap, Count a woollen cap-comforter, Baron his big peasant's hat; in the other hand each of them carries a pistol, cocked. A short way behind follow all the others, in silence.

Then Duke begins reciting the prayers for the dead; the Latin words sound heavy with anger in his mouth, like curses; the two brothers-in-law intone the responses, with their pistols always cocked and their caps held to their chests. The funeral advances through the fields, at a slow pace; Duke gives the Fascists a few sharp orders every now and again, to go slowly, to hold the stretcher level, and to turn; eventually he orders them to stop and begin digging a grave.

The others also stop, some distance away, and stand looking on. The three Calabrian brothers-in-law stand near the stretcher and the two digging Fascists, their heads still bare,



* * *



still with their black woollen scarves and cocked pistols, saying Latin prayers. The Fascists work quickly; soon they have dug a deep trench and look up at the brothers-in-law.

"More," says Duke.

"Deeper?" ask the Fascists.

"No, wider," says Duke.

The Fascists go on digging and throwing up earth, making a trench two or three times wider.

"Enough," says Duke.

The Fascists lower the body of Marquis into the middle of the trench; then climb out to throw earth on top.

"Down," says Duke. "Cover it from down there."

The Fascists throw spadefuls of earth up on to the dead man until they are each standing in separate ditches with the corpse between them. Every now and again they turn round to see if Duke will let them get up again, but he tells them to go on throwing earth on the body, until there is a mound above it.

Then the others leave the brothers-in-law standing there with their bared heads and their cocked pistols; and the mist comes up, a thick mist that blurs shapes and muffles sound.

* * *

The story of the Calabrian's funeral, when known at brigade headquarters, aroused considerable disapproval, and Giacinto the commissar was called once again to report. Meanwhile the men in the hut seem gripped by a wild exaggerated gaiety as they listen to the jokes of Pin, who, sparing the mourning brothers-in-law for that evening, has launched out against Long Zena.

Giglia is kneeling by the fire, handing bits of wood one by one to her husband, who is trying to coax up the flames; meanwhile she is following what's said and laughing and swivelling her green eyes around the room. And every time her eyes meet the shadowed ones of Dritto, she laughs and



* * *



Dritto laughs too, that evil sick laugh of his, and they gaze fixedly at each other, until she lowers her eyes and looks serious again.

"Pin, stop a bit," says Giglia, "and sing that song which goes: Who is it knocking at my door . . .?"

Pin leaves the Genoese in peace and begins on her.

"Say, Giglia, who would you like to come knocking on your door?" asks Pin, "when your husband's not at home!"

The cook raises his bald head, reddened by the heat of the fire, with the sour little laugh he gives when he is being made fun of: "What I'd like is to see you come knocking at my door, with Duke behind you waving a big knife and saying, 'I'll bbblow your bbbrains out!' "

But the attempt to bring in Duke again is a clumsy one and does not work. Pin takes a step or two towards Mancino and says with a frown and a sideways grin: "What, Mancino, you mean to say you really didn't notice that time?"

Mancino has learnt by now that it's best not to ask Pin what he means.

"No, I didn't, did you?" he replies, but gives his sour laugh, because he knows Pin won't spare him and that the others are hanging on his lips to hear what he'll come out with.

"That time after you'd been at sea a year and your wife had a baby and took it off to the foundling home and you came back and noticed nothing?"

The others, who have held their breaths till now, burst into roars of laughter and try to draw the cook on : "Oh, Mancino, what happened? You never told us about that!"

Mancino laughs too, but sourly as a green lemon. "Why?" he says to Pin. "Did you meet the child when you were at the foundling home for bastards yourself?"

"That's enough," says Giglia, "can't you say anything that isn't malicious, Pin? Now sing us that song; it's so lovely."

"If I feel like it," says Pin; "I don't work to orders."

Dritto gets slowly to his feet, stretching: "Go on, Pin, sing



* * *



that song she's told you to, or out you go on guard duty."

Pin shakes the hair off his eyes and grins at him. "Hey, let's hope the Germans don't come. The chief's feeling sentimental to-night."

He is all ready to parry the expected blow; but Dritto is looking at Giglia from his shaded eyes, above the cook's big head. Pin then gets into position, with his chin up and his chest out, and begins:

Who is it knocking at my front door, at my front door? Who is it knocking at my front door?

It is a wild haunting song which Pin learnt from an old woman down in the Alley; perhaps it was sung once by storytellers at fairs.

'Tis a Moorish captain with all his slaves, with all his slaves, 'Tis a Moorish captain with all his slaves.

"Firewood," says Mancino, and reaches out a hand towards Giglia. She takes up a broom made of sticks, but Dritto holds a hand out over the cook's head and takes it.

Tell me, woman, where is your son, where is your son? Tell me, woman, where is your son?

Mancino still has his hand out and Dritto is now burning the sticks. Then Giglia holds out a handful of millet leaves above her husband's head and her hand meets Dritto's. Pin is following their movements with attentive eyes as he goes on singing.

My son has gone to war and can't return, and can't return, My son has gone to war and can't return.



* * *



Dritto has taken Giglia's hand with one of his, then seized the millet leaves in the other and thrown them on the fire; after which he lets go of her hand and they look at each other.

May he he choked hy the hread he eats, hy the bread he eats, May he he choked hy the hread he eats.

Pin is following every movement with sparkling eyes; he is throwing more and more into his singing at every couplet, as if his very soul were in it.

And may he he drowned hy the water he drinks, hy the

water he drinks And may he he drowned hy the water he drinks.

Now Dritto is climbing over the cook and is near Giglia. Pin's voice thunders in his throat as if it would crack open.

May he he swallowed hy the earth he treads, hy the earth

he treads, May he he swallowed hy the earth he treads.

Dritto is now crouching down by Giglia's side; she is handing him bits of wood and he is putting them on the fire. The others are all intent on the song, which has reached its most dramatic point.

Woman, what are you saying, for I am your son, for I am

your son; Woman, what are you saying, for 1 am your son!

The flames on the fire are too high now; some of the wood should be taken off, not more put on, or the hay on the floor above will catch fire. But Giglia and Dritto are still passing each other twigs and leaves.



* * *



Forgive me, son, for speaking had of you, for speaking

had of you, Forgive me, son, for speaking had of you.

Pin is sweating from the heat, and trembling all over with the effort he is making; the last high note was so piercing that a flapping and raucous screech can be heard from under the dark roof; the hawk Babeuf has woken up.

He drew out his sword and cut off her head, cut off her

head, He drew out his sword and cut off her head.

Mancino has now put his hands on his knees, he has heard the hawk wake and is getting up to feed it.

Off went the head and spun into the hall, spun into the

hall, Off went the head and spun into the hall.

The cook always has a sack by him filled with intestines of slaughtered animals.

Now the hawk is perching on one of his fingers and Mancino is feeding bits of blood-red kidneys into its beak.

On the floor of that room grew a heautiful flower, a

heautiful flower, On the floor of that room grew a heautiful flower.

Pin draws in breath for the last lines. He moves near Dritto and Giglia and shouts almost into their ears:

The flower of a mother killed hy her own son, killed by

her own son, The flower of a mother killed hy her own son.



* * *



Pin flings himself to the ground, exhausted. Everyone breaks into applause. Babeuf squawks. At that moment there is a shout from the men sleeping above: "Fire! Fire!"

The flames have grown into a huge bonfire, crackling and spreading over the hay covering the logs above.

"Out! Out!" The men are all stumbling about in confusion, snatching at weapons, boots, blankets, falling over others lying down.

Dritto has regained control of himself and jumped to his feet. "Quick! Clear the place! First automatics and ammunition, then rifles. Last the sacks and blankets. And remember the rations!"

The men, some of whom were lying barefoot, are seized with panic and snatching at anything that comes to hand and flinging themselves at the door. Pin plunges in between their legs and opens himself a way out, then runs to find a place from which to admire the fire. What a wonderful sight it is!

Dritto has pulled his pistol out. "No one leaves before everything's saved! Out with the things and go back! The first man I see making off I'll shoot!"

The flames are already licking the walls, but the men have got over their panic and are now leaping back into the middle of the flames and smoke to save the weapons and rations. Dritto enters too and shouts orders, coughing amid the smoke, then comes out again to call others and prevent their escaping. He finds Mancino in a bush with all his belongings round him and orders him back to the hut to get the cooking-pot.

"Anyone I don't see going back will catch it from me!"

Giglia passes him, calmly going towards the fire, with that strange smile of hers. "Go away!" he mutters to her.

He's a poor creature, is Dritto, but he has an instinct for command; he knows that the fire is his fault, due to his losing control of himself; he knows that he will certainly be in serious trouble with his superiors, but now he is a leader again, his nostrils quivering as he directs the evacuation of the hut in



* * *



the middle of the fire, dominating the confused rushing to and fro of the men caught by a surprise while resting, who would have lost all the material as long as they saved themselves.

"Upstairs!" he shouts. "There's still a machine-gun there and two haversacks of ammunition!"

"Can't get up there!" they reply, "the floor's all flames."

Suddenly there is a shout: "The floor's falling in! All outside!"

Now explosions can be heard — some grenades which had remained in the straw. Dritto shouts, "All outside! Keep away from the hut! Take the stuff some way off, particularly the explosives!"

Pin, from his observation post on a mound, sees the fire break out into sudden bursts like fireworks and hears shots, even bursts of machine-gun fire, as the ammunition belts fall into the flames and explode, one cartridge after the other; from a distance it must sound like a battle. Sparks fly high into the sky, the tops of the chestnut trees seem tipped with gold; a branch first looks gilded then suddenly goes incandescent; the fire is spreading into the trees, soon perhaps it will burn up the whole wood.

Dritto is making a list of missing material: a Breda, six belts of ammunition, two rifles, lots of grenades, cartridges and a sackful of rice. He will never command again; they may shoot him; yet his nostrils are still quivering, he goes on apportioning jobs out among the men, as if this were a normal move

'Where are we going?"

"I'll tell you later. Let's get out of the woods. Come on.'

The detachment, loaded with weapons and baggage, moves off through the meadows in single file. Mancino is carrying the cooking-pot with Babeuf perching on top of it Pin has charge of the other kitchen things. Now a rumour begins circulating among the men : "The Germans have heard the shots and seen the fire, we'll soon have them on our heels." Dritto turns an impassive yellow face towards them



* * *



"Silence! No one is to say a word! Come on, walk!" He might be organising a retreat after an unsuccessful engagement.

CHAPTER EIGHT

The new camp is in a barn, where they are all crowded up on top of each other; the roof has fallen in and lets the rain through. In the morning they scatter to sun themselves among the alpenroses on the rocky slopes around, lie on the frosty bushes and take off their shirts to look for lice.

Pin likes being sent off by Mancino on errands to places nearby, to fill pails for the cooking-pot at the spring, or gather wood among the burnt trees with a little hatchet, or fish out water-cress for the cook's salads from the stream. Pin sings as he goes, looking at the sky and the clear morning world and the mountain butterflies of strange colours meandering over the meadows. Every time he keeps Mancino waiting impatiently while the fire goes out and the rice gets sticky, and each time he is cursed in every language under the sun when he arrives back, with his mouth full of strawberry juice and his eyes dancing with the fluttering of the butterflies. Then Pin becomes the little boy of Long Alley again, starting rows which go on for hours and draw the men away from the alpenroses to collect round the kitchen fire.

But when he wanders along the paths in the mornings Pin forgets the old streets with their stagnant mules' urine, the odour of male and female in his sister's unmade bed, the sour smell and smoke from the broken gratings and open drains, the hiss of the belt during that interrogation. Now Pin has discovered all kinds of coloured things; yellow and brown mushrooms growing damp in the earth, red spiders on



* * *



huge invisible nets, hares all legs and ears which appear suddenly on the path then leap zigzagging out of sight.

Yet a passing sudden thought is enough to draw Pin back into the squalid ambiguous world of human beings; and, with eyes screwed up and freckles clustering, he watches the crickets making love, or thrusts pine needles in the slimy backs of little toads, or makes water over an ant heap and watches the porous earth dissolve and open and hundreds of little red and black ants scurry away through the mud.

Then the world of men draws him again, of incomprehensible men with their opaque looks and angry mouths. And he goes back to Mancino, the little man whose laughter is getting sourer and sourer, and who never leaves his cooking pots to go into action but stays there perpetually talking about revolution, while the hawk flaps its clipped wings on his shoulder.

Cousin is different; although he seems to be forever complaining and hinting that he is the only one who really feels the strain of war, he still goes round by himself with his tommy-gun on his shoulder, and every time he returns to camp sets off again a few hours later, always with that reluctant air of his as if he is only doing it because he has to.

Whenever there is a mission to be carried out Dritto looks round and says: "Who wants to go?"

Then Cousin shakes his big head as if he were the victim of an unjust fate, loads his tommy-gun on his shoulder, and goes off sighing, with that gentle face of his looking more than ever like the mask on a fountain.

Dritto sprawls among the alpenroses with his arms behind his head and his gun between his knees, feeling sure that measures are being taken against him at brigade headquarters. The men's eyes are heavy with sleep above their matted beards; Dritto tries not to look at them as he feels their glances are full of dumb resentment against him. But they still obey him, as if by mutual agreement, to avoid drifting to disaster.



* * *



Yet he listens to everything, and every now and then gets up to give an order; he does not want the men to get out of the habit of thinking of him as their leader; if they do, even for a moment, he will have lost them.

The burning of the hut has never worried Pin; it was a wonderful fire and the new camp is surrounded by lovely places to explore. But he's a little frightened of going near Dritto; he wonders whether Dritto will try and put all the blame for the fire on to him, for distracting attention by his singing.

Now Dritto is calling him: "Pin, come here!"

Pin goes towards the sprawling Dritto, not daring to bring out any of his usual jokes; but he knows Dritto is hated and feared by the others and feels rather proud to be near him at that moment, almost as if he were an accomplice.

"D'you know how to clean a pistol?" asks Dritto.

"Well," says Pin, "you take it to bits and I'll clean the parts.

Everyone is a little nervous of Pin, as they never know what he will say, but Dritto senses that to-day Pin will not mention the fire or Giglia or any of those things, so the boy is the only member of the band he can be with.

He spreads out a handkerchief and puts the pieces down on it as he dismembers the pistol. Pin asks if he can help to take it to pieces and Dritto shows him how. Pin enjoys sitting there talking to Dritto like this, in low voices and without either saying anything disagreeable to the other. He compares Dritto's pistol with his own buried one and talks about the parts that are different or better in both. And Dritto does not make the usual comment, that he doesn't believe Pin has a buried pistol; perhaps he does believe it, anyway, and only said he didn't to make fun of Pin; Dritto seems a nice man when Pin talks to him like this, and when he's explaining how the pistol works he becomes enthusiastic and no longer looks obsessed by evil thoughts. Even pistols, when talked



* * *



about like this, no longer seem instruments for killing people, but strange enchanted toys.

The other men lie about looking angry and abstracted; they take no notice of Pin wandering round them and do not want to hear him sing. It is bad when discouragement seeps into the men's bones like damp from the earth, and they no longer trust their leaders and feel they are already surrounded by Germans with flamethrowers among the rocks and alpen-roses, and that they will have to flee from valley to valley and die one by one in this never-ending war. They begin discussing the war — when it started and who wanted it and when it would end, and if things would be better then or worse than before.

Pin does not know the difference between when there's war and when there isn't. He seems to have heard people talking about war ever since he was born, only the bombings and the black-out came later.

Every now and again aeroplanes pass over the mountains; one can look at their undersides, without escaping into tunnels as one has to in towns. Then far away towards the sea there is a sound of bombs, and the men think of their homes which are perhaps in ruins at that moment and tell each other that the war will never end and how they can't understand who wanted it.

"I know who wanted it! I've seen them!" a man called Carabiniere suddenly says, "It was the students!"

Carabiniere is even more ignorant than Duke and lazier than Long Zena; his father was a peasant who, realising he would never get his son to wield a spade, said to him: "Join the Carabinieri"; so the son joined and was given a black uniform with a white bandolier and carried out his duties in town and country without ever realising what he was doing. After the 8th of September he was told to arrest the parents of deserters, then one day he heard that he was going to be deported himself as he was for the King; so he escaped. First



* * *



the partisans had wanted to make him dig his own grave, because of those parents of deserters he had arrested; then they realised that he was just a poor wretch and had sent him to Dritto's detachment, as no one wanted him in any of the others.

"In '40 I was in Naples and I know!" says Carabiniere. "It was the students! They carried flags and placards and yelled 'Malta and Gibraltar' and that they wanted five meals a day."

Duke spits violently and touches his Austrian pistol. "The Carabinieri are all pigs, swine and bastards!" he says between his teeth. In his part of the country there is a long history of struggle with the Carabinieri, of Carabinieri shot and killed by wayside shrines.

Carabiniere protests, panting and waving his big peasant hands in front of his tiny eyes and low forehead.

"Us Carabinieri were against them! Yes, sir, we were against the war the students wanted. We tried to keep them in order! But we were twenty to one against, so they had their war!"

Mancino is standing a little way off, looking as if he's on tenterhooks; he is stirring the rice in the cooking-pot; if he stops stirring for a second it will stick. Meanwhile he can hear snatches from time to time of what the men are saying; when they talk politics he always wants to be right among them, for they know nothing, he thinks, and need him to explain everything. But now he can't leave the cooking-pot, and gives little hops of desperation, wringing his hands; "Capitalism!" he shouts now and again, "Exploitation by the bourgeoisie," as if suggesting ideas to the men, who refuse to listen to him.

"In Naples in '40," explains Carabiniere, "there were great struggles between students and Carabinieri! And if we Carabinieri had had our way there wouldn't have been a war! But the students wanted to burn down the town hall! Mussolini was forced to make war!"



* * *



"Poor old Mussolini!" jeer the others.

"To hell with you and your Mussolini!" shouts Duke.

From the kitchen comes Mancino's voice, bleating: "Mussolini! Imperialist bourgeoisie!"

"The town hall, they tried to burn the town hall! So what could us Carabinieri do? If we'd put them in their places, though, Mussolini would never have started the war!"

Mancino, torn between his duty to the cooking-pot and his longing to go and talk about revolution, is bleating away until finally he attracts the attention of Long Zena and signs for him to come over. Long Zena thinks he is being called to taste the rice and decides to make the effort to get up. Mancino shouts: "Imperialist bourgeoisie, tell 'em it's the bourgeoisie making war for its markets!"

"Oh, hell," says Long Zena and turns his back on him. Mancino's speeches always bore him to death; he can't understand them, he knows nothing about the bourgeoisie or communism, and he is not attracted by a world in which everyone has to work, he prefers one in which everyone is out for himself and is working as little as possible.

"Free enterprise," yawns Long Zena, flopping down among the alpenroses again, and scratching himself through his trousers, "I'm for free enterprise; and everyone being free to get rich by his own efforts."

Carabiniere is now explaining his conception of history; there are two forces struggling against each other, the Carabinieri, who are poor unfortunates trying to keep order, and the students, the big-shots, the cavalieri, the lawyers, doctors, commendatori, those with salaries undreamt of, even, by the Carabinieri, and who still aren't satisfied and start wars in order to get more.

"You don't understand anything!" shouts Mancino, who cannot hold out another moment and has now left Pin to look after the cooking-pot. "Imperialism is caused by overproduction!"



* * *



"Back to your cooking!" they shout at him. "And take care the rice doesn't stick this time too!"

But Mancino is now standing in the middle of them, his little body enveloped in the big sailor's jersey with its shoulders covered with hawk's droppings, waving his fists in an endless speech about financial imperialism, arms traffic and the universal revolution that will take place when the war is over, in England and America too, and the abolition of frontiers by the International and the Red Flag.

The men lie sprawled among the alpenroses, their thin faces covered with matted beard, their hair all over their foreheads; they wear odd pieces of uniform, all tending in colour towards a dirty grey; firemen's or Fascist or German tunics with the badges torn off. All of them are there for different reasons — many are deserters from the Fascist forces or freed prisoners, some are still boys, impelled by an obstinate impulse, a vague longing to go against things.

They all dislike Mancino because he vents himself in words and arguments, not in shooting; to them his arguments seem useless, as he talks about enemies they know nothing about, such as capitalists and financiers. It's rather like Mussolini expecting the Italians to hate the British and the Abys-sinians, whom none of them had ever seen, and who live beyond the ocean. And the men pull the cook in among them, play hopscotch over his little curved shoulders and hit him on his big bald head, while the hawk furiously rolls its eyes.

Dritto, still a little way off, now intervenes, dangling his machine-gun against his knees. "Go and see to the food, Mancino."

Dritto does not like discussions much either; or rather he only likes to talk about actions and weapons, about the new small tommy-guns which the Fascists are beginning to use and how he would like to lay his hands on one; but what he likes more than anything is giving orders, telling the men to



* * *



get under cover while he himself jumps up to fire short bursts.

"Go on, the rice is burning, can't you smell it?" shout the men at Mancino, pushing him away.

Mancino calls on the commissar for support: "Hey, Giacinto, why don't you say something? What d'you think you're doing? They're right to call this the Fascist detachment, one can't even talk politics here!"

Giacinto has just returned from headquarters, but has not yet said if there is any news; all he has done is shrug his shoulders and mutter that the brigade commissar would be passing before nightfall on inspection. After hearing this the men throw themselves down among the alpenroses once more; now the brigade commissar will soon be here to arrange everything, and it's useless to worry. Dritto also thinks it's useless to worry, the brigade commissar will tell him what his fate is to be; and he too stretches out again among the alpenroses, though more apprehensively, tearing up little bits of shrub in his fingers.

Mancino is now complaining to Giacinto that no one in the detachment ever talks to the men about why they are partisans and what communism is. Giacinto has lice clustered thick on his head and all over the lower part of his stomach little white eggs are sticking to every single hair; Giacinto goes on cracking eggs and lice between his thumb-nails with a little click, in a gesture that has now become mechanical.

"Well," he begins in a resigned voice as if he does not want to put anyone out, even Mancino, "each of us knows why he's a partisan. I was a tinker and used to go round in the country and my cry could be heard a long way off and the women would come and bring their broken cooking pots for me to mend. I used to go into their houses and joke with the servants and was sometimes given eggs and a glass of wine. Now I can't go round the country any more because I'd be arrested; and then the bombing has messed everything up too. That's why we're partisans; so we can be tinkers again and



* * *



so eggs and wine can be cheap, and so we can't be arrested any more and there'll be no more air raids. And then we want communism too. Communism means there won't be any more houses where the door's banged in one's face, so one's forced to enter by the chicken run at night. Communism means going into a house and being given soup even if one is a tinker; and if they're eating pudding at Christmas then they'll give one pudding. That's what communism means. For example: here we all are so full of lice that they almost drag us about in our sleep. Now I've just been to brigade headquarters and seen they have insect powder there. Then I said, 'Fine Communists you are, you don't send this to our detachment.' So they said they'd send some. That's what communism means."

The men have listened to him attentively and with approval; these are things anyone can understand. One of them who is smoking passes his cigarette to a comrade, and another who has to go on guard promises not to cut his turn short and to stay the whole hour before calling for his relief. They all begin discussing the insect powder which is to be sent to them, if it will kill the eggs as well as the lice or if it will only stun the insects so that an hour later they'll be biting more than ever.

No one would be talking about the war any more, if Cousin did not begin speaking: "Say what you like but according to my way of looking at it the war was started by women."

When Cousin gets started on his views of women he is even more boring than the cook; but at least he makes no attempt to convince anyone and just seems to be complaining on his own.

"I was a soldier in Albania, Greece, France and North Africa," he says, "I've been in the Alpini for eighty-three months. And in every country I've seen brothels full of women with soldiers queuing up outside, and brothels for



* * *



N.C.O.s and brothels for officers; and as well as the brothels women taking the soldiers into the fields or up to their rooms. There they all used to be, waiting for the soldiers to come out of barracks, and the more lice-ridden and filthy we were the more they liked us. I let myself be persuaded once and all I got out of it was the clap, for three months I had to lean against the wall every time I wanted to piss. Now when one's in a distant country and seeing no other women but those, the only consolation is thinking of one's own home and one's own wife if one has one, or of a fiancée, and saying to oneself, anyway she's all right. Then one comes back and yes, sir, finds the wife, while one was away, has been drawing her allowance and going to bed with all the men around; and when I say 'one' I mean everyone, for everyone's been through that with those filthy creatures called women."

The others know that Cousin is telling his own story, that his wife went with everyone while he was away and had children whose fathers were unknown.

"Even that's not enough, though," Cousin goes on, "d'you realise why our men are always being caught by the Fascists? Because the place is full of women acting as spies, of wives denouncing their husbands; why, at this very moment all our women are sitting on the Fascists' knees cleaning their guns for them to come and kill us with."

The others are beginning to have enough of this now, and shout at him to stop; it's one thing his being unlucky with his wife and her denouncing him to the Germans to get rid of him and forcing him to take to the woods, but that is no good reason to insult everyone else's women.

"Women, women, I tell you," goes on Cousin stubbornly, "they're behind everything. Mussolini got the idea of the war from the Petacci sisters. . . ."

The men comment rather jeeringly on this idea; it couldn't have been just the Petacci sisters who made Mussolini go to war.



* * *



"You see," Cousin goes on, "a woman only has to arrive in a place and . . . you get what I mean."

Now the men don't contradict him because they understand what he is referring to and want to hear how far he'll go.

"... a woman has only to arrive in a place and some fool at once loses his head about her . . ." says Cousin. Cousin is a man who likes being friendly with everyone, but he has a sharp tongue and when he has something to say he doesn't care who he says it to.

". . . it doesn't matter when the fool is just anyone, but if he's a fool with responsibilities . . ."

The men look at Dritto; he's lying apart, but certainly listening. The men are a little afraid that Cousin may go too far and cause a terrific row.

". . . and ends up by setting fire to a house because of a woman . . ."

There, he's said it, think the men, now something will happen. It's better this way, they say, if it has to come up some time.

But at that moment a roar is heard above them and the whole sky is filled with aeroplanes. All attention shifts to them. It is a big formation of bombers; soon some town will be left gutted and smoking beneath them, while they vanish into the clouds. Pin feels the earth vibrating under the roar and thinks of the tons of waiting bombs passing over his head. At that moment the Old Town must be emptying and people crowding into the muddy tunnel. From the south comes the deep sound of falling bombs.

Pin sees that Dritto has gone up on to a rise and is looking down into the valley through his binoculars. He joins him. Dritto is smiling his evil sad smile, as he turns the lenses.

"Can I have a look too, Dritto?" asks Pin.

"Here you are," says Dritto, and passes him the binoculars.

Through a coloured confusion in the lenses gradually



* * *



appears the crest of the hills down above the sea, and a big white cloud rising. More explosions can be heard; the bombing is still going on.

"Fine, destroy everything!" shouts Dritto, clapping a hand against his palm. "My own home first! Fling it down! My own home first!"

CHAPTER NINE

Towards dusk arrive Ferriera and Kim, the commander and the commissar of the brigade. Mist is rising outside in wisps, like dust from a series of slammed doors, and in the barn the men crouch round the fire and the two from brigade. These hand round a packet of cigarettes until it is empty. They are men of few words. Ferriera is a sturdy young man, with an Alpine cap, a small blond beard, and a pair of big cold clear eyes with which he constantly glances up through half closed lids. Kim is skinny, with a long reddish face, and moustaches which he is continually chewing.

Ferriera is a workman, born in the mountains, and is cold and clear by nature; he listens to everything with a slight smile of assent and has meanwhile already made up his mind on his own — how the brigade is to be deployed, where the heavies are to be placed, when the mortars should go into action. For him partisan warfare is as exact and precise as a machine; he has taken the revolutionary impulse matured in factories up into the mountains where he was born, and his courage and cunning is now used in places every yard of which he knows.

Kim, on the other hand, is a student; he has a great yearning for logic, for certainty about cause and effect, otherwise his mind is apt to crowd at every second with unanswered questions. He has an enormous interest in humanity; that is why he is a medical student, for he knows that the explanation



* * *



of everything is to be found in the grinding moving cells of the human body, and not in philosophic speculation. He will become a mental specialist, a psychiatrist. People do not like him very much because he looks them fixedly in the eyes as if he were trying to discover the source of their thoughts; and then he comes out suddenly with point-blank questions that have nothing to do with the conversation, about the other's childhood or love-life. For him also, behind human beings, there is the great machine of class movements, the machine that is fed by little daily gestures and in which other gestures burn away without leaving a trace; the machine of history. Everything must be logical, everything must be understood, both in history and in men's minds; but there is still a gap between one and the other, a dark area where collective reasons become individual reasons, forming monstrous deviations and unexpected combinations. And Kim goes round the detachments every day with his slim Sten-gun hanging from one shoulder, talking to the commissars and commanders, studying the men, analysing the position of each one, breaking every problem down into its component parts; "a, b, c," he says; everything must be clear, clear in others as it is to him. Now the men are crowding round Ferriera and Kim, asking for news of the war; of that distant war on the military fronts, and of the near threatening one nearby, their own. Ferriera explains where the British have halted for months down in the south, and the men curse the British, who only seem capable of bombing their homes, not of advancing or even dropping them supplies. Then Ferriera tells them the great news of the day: a German column is advancing up the valley, to comb the mountains; they know where the partisan camps are and will burn houses and villages around. But at dawn the whole brigade will move up on to the crest of the mountains, and will also be reinforced by other brigades; the Germans will suddenly find all the roads under a hail of fire and will be forced to retreat.



* * *



Then the men all break into movement; their backs ripple, they clasp hands, jerk out words through set teeth; it's the battle already starting in them, their faces are already tensed in fighting expressions, their hands groping for weapons to feel the touch of steel.

"They saw the fire, that's why they're coming," says someone. Dritto is standing a little apart, the flickering flames lighting his lowered lids.

"The fire, yes, because of the fire too, of course. But there's something else," says Kim, slowly blowing out a mouthful of smoke; the men stand there silently; Dritto raises his eyes.

"We've been betrayed by one of our own men," says Kim. Then the atmosphere becomes tense, as if a wind were cutting into the men's bones; the wind of betrayal, cold and damp as a wind off the marshes.

"Who was it?"

"Pelle. He went to the Black Brigade. Just like that, on his own, without being captured. Due to him four of our men who were in prison there have already been shot. He takes part in the interrogations of anyone caught and denounces them all."

This is the kind of news that clogs the men's blood with despair, and prevents them thinking. Pelle was there with them, only a few nights before, saying: "Listen, I'll tell you an action we can carry out!" It seems strange not to hear his wheezy breathing behind them as he greases a machine-gun for to-morrow's action. Instead of which Pelle is now down there in the forbidden town, wearing a big death's head on his black cap and carrying beautiful new weapons, no longer frightened of round-ups, and driven always by that inner frenzy of his which makes him blink his cold-reddened eyes and lick his dribbling lips, a frenzy now turned against his former comrades, but without hatred or rancour, as if he were playing a game with friends in which the stake is death.



* * *



Suddenly Pin thinks of his pistol; perhaps Pelle has found it, as he knows all the paths by the river-bed from taking girls there, and now he is wearing it oiled and gleaming all over, as his weapons usually are, on his Black Brigade uniform. Or perhaps he was just lying when he said he knew the place where the spiders make their nests, and had used the story as an excuse for going down into the town to betray his comrades and get issued with those new almost silent German weapons.

"We must kill him now," the men say to each other, as if they were accepting a necessity; perhaps, secretly, they would prefer to see him return next day, loaded up with new weapons, and continue his private war with and against them in that grim game of his.

"Red Wolf has gone down into the town to organise the Gap against him," says Ferriera, with a slight smile.

"I'll go too," various men say. But Ferriera says that now they must concentrate on getting ready for next day's battle, which will be a decisive one. The men scatter to prepare their weapons and apportion jobs.

Ferriera and Kim call Dritto aside.

"We've had a report on the fire," they say.

"That's the way it happened," says Dritto. He has no desire to justify himself. Nothing matters now.

"Is there anyone else responsible for the fire?" asks Kim.

And Dritto says: "It was all my fault."

The two gaze seriously at him. Dritto is thinking how much he would like to leave the partisans and hide away in a place he knows of, till the end of the war.

"Have you any excuse to offer?" they ask him, with nerve-racking patience.

"No. That's the way it happened."

Now they'll either say: "Go away" or "We'll shoot you." Instead of which Ferriera says: "All right. We'll talk about this another day. How are you feeling, Dritto?"

Dritto's yellow eyes are on the ground. "I'm ill," he says.



* * *



"You must try to get really well for to-morrow," says Kim. "It's very important for you too, the battle to-morrow. Very, very important. Think it over."

They do not take their eyes off him and Dritto feels a mounting longing to let himself drift.

"I'm ill," he says, "I'm very ill."

"Now," says Ferriera. "To-morrow you must keep along the crest of Mount Pellegrino from the pilon to the second gorge, d'you understand? There you'll get orders where to move to. Keep the squads well apart; the machine-guns are to go with the gunners and riflemen so that they can move together when necessary. Every single man must go into action, without any exception, even the quartermaster, even the cook."

Dritto has followed all this with little nods of assent, and occasional shakes of his head.

"No one excepted," he repeats, "not even the cook?" and he listens attentively.

"You must all be up on the crest by dawn, d'you understand?" Kim looks at him, chewing his moustache. "Are you quite sure you understand, Dritto?"

There almost seems a tone of affection in his voice, but perhaps it's just persuasion, as it's such an important battle.

"I'm very ill," says Dritto, "very ill."

* * *

Kim and Ferriera are walking along the dark mountainside towards another encampment.

"Surely you see now it was a mistake, Kim?" says Ferriera.

Kim shakes his head. "No, it's not a mistake," he says.

"But it is," says the commander, "it was a mistaken idea of yours to make up a detachment entirely of men who can't be trusted, with a commander who can be trusted even less. You see what happens. If we'd divided them up among the good ones it might have kept them on the right lines."



* * *



Kim continues to chew his moustache. "For my part," he says, "this is the detachment I'm most pleased with."

At this Ferriera nearly loses his calm; he raises his ice-cold eyes and rubs his forehead. "But Kim, when will you realise that this is a fighting brigade, not an experimental laboratory? I can understand your getting a scientific satisfaction from watching the reactions of these men, all arranged as you wanted them, proletariat in one part, peasants in another, then 'sub-proletariat,' as you call it. . . . The political work you ought to be doing, it seems to me, is mixing them all up together and giving a class-sense to those who haven't got it, so as to achieve this blessed unity we hear so much about . . . Apart from the military value, of course. . . ."

Kim, who has difficulty in expressing himself, shakes his head.

"Nonsense," he says. "Nonsense. The men all fight with the same sort of urge in them . . . not the same, that is . . . each has an urge of his own . . . but they're all fighting in unison now, each as much as the other. Then there's Dritto, there's Pelle . . . You don't understand what it costs them . . . Well, they too have the same urge . . . Any little thing is enough to save or lose them. . . . That's what political work is ... to give them a sense . . ."

When Kim talks to the men and analyses the situation for them, he is absolutely clear and dialectical. But when he is talking like this just to one other person to hear him, it makes one's head spin. Ferreira sees things more simply. "All right, let's give them this sense, let's organise them the way I say."

Kim blows into his moustache. "This isn't an army, you see, they aren't soldiers to whom one can say: this is your duty. You can't talk about duty here, you can't talk about ideals like country, liberty, communism. The men don't want to hear about ideals, anyone can have those, they have ideals on the other side too. You see what happens when that extremist cook begins his sermonising? They shout at him and



* * *



knock him about. They don't need ideals, myths, to shout 'Long live . . .' They fight and die without shouting anything."

"Why do they fight, then?" asks Ferriera. He knows why he does, everything is perfecdy clear to him.

"Well," says Kim, "at this moment the various detachments are climbing silently up towards their positions. Tomorrow many of them will be wounded or dead. They know that. What drives them to lead this life, what makes them fight? Well, first, the peasants who live in these mountains, it's easier with them. The Germans burn their villages, take away their cattle. Theirs is a basic human war, one to defend their own country, for the peasants really have a country. So they join up with us, young and old, with their old shot-guns and cartridge pouches; whole villages of them; they're with us as we're defending their country. And defending their country becomes a serious ideal for them, transcends them, as an end in itself; they sacrifice even their homes, even their cattle, to go on fighting. Then there are other peasants for whom 'country' remains something selfish; their cattle, their homes, their crops. And to keep all that they become spies, Fascists . . . there are whole villages which are our enemies. Then there are the workers. The workers have a background of their own, of wages and strikes, work and struggle elbow to elbow. They're a class, the workers are. They know there's something better in life and they fight for that something better. They have a 'country' too, a 'country' still to be conquered, and they're fighting to conquer it. Down in the town there are factories which will be theirs; they can already see the red writing on the walls and the banners flying on the factory chimneys. But there's no sentimentality in them. They understand reality and how to change it. Red Wolf, for instance. D'you see what I mean? Red Wolf! Then there is an intellectual or a student or two, very few of them though, here and there, with ideas in their heads that are often vague or twisted.



* * *



Their 'country' consists of words, or at the most of some book. But as they fight they find that those words of theirs no longer have any meaning, and they make new discoveries about men's struggles, and they just fight on without asking themselves questions, until they can find new words and rediscover the old ones, changed now, with unsuspected meanings. Who else is there? Foreign prisoners, who've escaped from concentration camps and joined us; they're fighting for a real proper country, a distant country which they want to get back to and which is theirs just because it is distant. But, after all, is this only a struggle between symbols? Must a man, to kill a German, think not of that German but of something else, with a substitution which is enough to turn his brain? Must everything and everybody become a Chinese shadow-play, a myth?"

Ferriera strokes his blond beard; he doesn't see anything in all this.

"It's not like that," he says.

"No, it's not like that," Kim goes on, "I know that too. It's not like that. Because there's something else, common to all of them. Take Dritto's detachment; petty thieves, carabinieri, ex-soldiers, black marketeers, down-and-outs; men on the fringes of society, who got along somehow, with nothing to defend and nothing to lose; either they're defective physically, or they have fixations, or they're fanatics. No revolutionary idea can ever appear there, linked as they are to the millstones grinding them. Or if it does it will be born twisted, the child of rage and humiliation, such as that extremist cook's, whose talk is like the screeches of that trained hawk of his. Why do they fight, then? They have no 'country,' either real or invented. And yet you know there's courage, there's hatred in them too. And that hatred is due to a resentment they have dragged along with them since their childhood, and which may be either lively or dormant. It comes from the squalor of their lives, the filth of their homes, the obscenities they've known ever since babyhood, the strain of having to be bad.



* * *



All that has become hatred, an anonymous, aimless, dumb hatred, which finds expression here in firing machine-guns, making prisoners dig their own graves, and in a bitter yearning to get to grips with the enemy. And any little thing, a false step, a momentary impulse, is enough to send them over to the other side, to the Black Brigade, like Pelle, there to shoot with the same resentment, the same hatred, against either side, it doesn't matter which."

Ferriera mutters into his beard: "So you think the spirit of our men . . . and the Black Brigade's . . . the same thing?"

"The same thing, the same thing . . . but, if you see what I mean . . ." Kim has stopped, with a finger pointing as if he were keeping the place in a book, "The same thing but the other way round. Because here we're in the right, there they're in the wrong. Here we're achieving something, there they're just strengthening the rivets. That age-old resentment which weighs down on Dritto's men, on all of us, including you and me, and which finds expression in shooting and killing enemies, the Fascists have that too. But with us nothing is lost, not a gesture, not a shot, though each may be the same as theirs — d'you see what I mean? — they will all serve if not to free us then to free our children, to create a world that is serene, without resentment, a world in which no one has to be bad. The others are on the side of lost gestures, of useless resentment, which are lost and useless even if they should win, because they are not making positive history, they are not helping to free themselves but to repeat and perpetuate resentment and hatred, until in another twenty or a hundred or a thousand years it will begin all over again, the struggle between us and them; and we shall both be fighting with the same anonymous hatred in our eyes, though always, perhaps without knowing it, we shall be fighting for redemption, they to remain slaves. That is the real meaning of the struggle now, the real, absolute meaning, beyond the



* * *



various official meanings. An elementary, anonymous urge to vindicate all our humiliations; the worker from his exploitation, the peasant from his ignorance, the petty bourgeois from his inhibitions, the outcast from his corruption. This is what I believe our political work is, to use human misery against itself, for our own redemption, as the Fascists use misery to perpetuate misery and man fighting man."

Only the blue of Ferriera's eyes and the yellow glimmer of his beard can be seen in the dark. He shakes his head. He does not feel this resentment; he is precise as a mechanic and practical as a mountaineer; for him the struggle is a precise machine of which he knows the workings and purpose.

"It seems impossible," he says, "it seems impossible that with all that nonsense in your head you can still be a good commissar and talk clearly to the men."

Kim is not displeased at Ferriera not understanding him; men like Ferriera must be talked to in exact terms; "a, b, c," one must say, things are either definite or they're "balls," for them there are no ambiguous or dark areas. But Kim does not reason that way, and so he believes himself to be superior to Ferriera; but now he would like to be able to think like Ferriera, to see no other reality but Ferriera's.

"Well, I'll say good-bye." They have reached a parting in the path. Now Ferriera will go on to Gamba's detachment and Kim to Baleno's. They have to separate in order to be able to inspect every detachment that night, before the battle.

Nothing else matters. Kim walks on alone, the slim Sten-gun hanging from his shoulder like a broken walking-stick. Nothing else matters. The tree trunks in the dark take on strange human shapes. Man carries his babyhood fears with him for his whole life long. "Perhaps," thinks Kim, "I'd be frightened, if I wasn't brigade commissar. Not to be frightened any more, that's the final aim of man."

Kim is logical when he is analysing the situation with the detachment commissars, but when he is walking along alone



* * *



and reasoning with himself things become mysterious and magical again, and life seems full of miracles. Our heads are still full of magic and miracles, thinks Kim. Sometimes he feels he is walking amid a world of symbols, like his namesake, little Kim in the middle of India, in that book of Kipling's which he had so often re-read as a boy. "Kim . . . Kim . . . Who is Kim . . . ?" Now that he is walking over the mountains on the night before a battle, has he, he wonders, turned out to be right about life and death, after that gloomy childhood of his as a rich man's son, and his shy adolescence? Well, his thoughts are logical, he can analyse everything with perfect clarity. But no, he's not serene. His parents were serene, those parents from the great middle class which created their own riches. The proletariat is serene for it knows what it wants, so are the peasants who are now doing sentry duty over their own villages. Will Kim ever be serene? One day perhaps, if we all achieve serenity and do not understand so much because we will have understood everything. Now we still give too much weight to things that don't exist.

Here men still have troubled eyes and haggard faces. Kim has become fond of these men, though. That little boy in Dritto's detachment, for instance. What's his name? With that rage eating up his freckly face, even when he laughs . . . He's said to be the brother of a prostitute. Why is he fighting? He doesn't know it's so that he should no longer be the brother of a prostitute. And those Calabrian brothers-in-law. They're fighting so as not to be despised folk from the south any more. And that Carabiniere is fighting so that he won't feel a Carabiniere any more, always at the heels of others like him. Then there's Cousin, the good, gigantic, ruthless Cousin . . . We all have a secret wound which we are fighting to avenge. Even Ferriera? Yes, perhaps even Ferriera; the incapacity of being able to get the world to go as he wants it. Not Red Wolf, though. Because everything that Red Wolf wants is possible.



* * *



He must be made to want the right thing, that is political work. And learn that what he wants is right; that too is political work, commissar's work.

Perhaps, one day, thinks Kim, I won't understand these things any more. I'll be serene, and understand men in a completely different way, a juster way, perhaps. Why perhaps? Well, I shan't say "perhaps" any more then, there won't be any more "perhaps" in me. And I'll have Dritto shot. Now I'm too linked to them and all their twists. To Dritto too. I know that Dritto must suffer a lot for always being determined to behave badly. Nothing in the world hurts so much as behaving badly. One day as a child I shut myself up for two days in my room without speaking. I suffered terribly but would not open the door and they had to come and fetch me by ladder through the window. I longed to be consoled and understood. Dritto feels the same. But he knows we'll shoot him. He wants to be shot. That longing gets hold of men sometimes. And Pelle, what is Pelle doing at this moment?

Kim walks on through a larch wood and thinks of Pelle down in the town going round on curfew patrol with the death's head badge on his cap. Pelle must be alone, alone with his anonymous mistaken hatred, alone with his betrayal gnawing at him and making him behave worse than ever to justify it. He'll shoot at the cats in the black-out, even, from rage, and the shots will wake the sleepers nearby, and make them start up in their beds.

Kim thinks of the column of Germans and Fascists who are perhaps at that moment advancing up the valley, towards the dawn which will bring death pouring down on their heads from the crests of the mountains. It is a column of lost gestures. One of the soldiers is waking up at a jolt of the truck and thinking "I love you Kate." In six or seven hours he'll be dead, we'll have killed him; even if he hadn't thought



* * *



"I love you Kate," it would have been the same; everything that he does or thinks is lost, cancelled from history.

I on the other hand am walking through a larch wood and every step I take is history. I think "I love you Adriana" and that is history, will have great consequences. I'll behave tomorrow in battle like a man who has thought to-night "I love you Adriana." Perhaps I don't do any great things, but history is made up of little anonymous gestures; I may die to-morrow even before that German, but everything I do before dying and my death too will be little parts of history, and all the thoughts I'm having now will influence my history to-morrow, to-morrow's history of the human race.

Now, instead of escaping into phantasy as I did when I was a child, I should be making a mental study of the details of the attack, the dispositions of weapons and squads. But I like thinking about those men, studying them, making discoveries about them. What will they do "afterwards" for instance? Will they recognise in post-war Italy something made by them? Red Wolf will understand, I think; I wonder what he'll do to put his understanding into practise, how will he use that adventurous ingenious spirit of his when there are no more sudden attacks or escapes to be made? We should all be like Red Wolf. There'll be some, on the other hand, whose anonymous resentment will continue, who will become individualists again, and thus sterile; they'll fall into crime, the great outlet for dumb resentments; they'll forget that history once walked by their side, breathed through their clenched teeth. The ex-Fascists will say: "Oh, the partisans! I told you so! I realised it at once!" And they won't have realised anything, either before or after.

One day Kim will be serene. Everything is clear with him now. Dritto, Pin, the Calabrian brothers-in-law. He knows how to behave towards each of them, without fear or pity. Sometimes when he is walking at night the mists of souls seem



* * *



to condense around him like the mists in the air; but he is a man who analyses; "a, b, c," he'll say to the commissars; he's a man who dominates situations. "I love you Adriana."

The valley is full of mist, and Kim is walking along a stony path as if he were on a lakeside. The larches appear out of the mist like mooring-poles. Kim . . . Kim . . . Who is Kim? He feels like the hero of that novel read in his childhood; the half-English half-Indian boy who travels across India looking for the river of purification.

Two hours ago he was talking to that liar Dritto, to the prostitute's brother, and now he is reaching the detachment of Baleno, the best in the brigade. There is a squad of Russians with Baleno, ex-prisoners who had escaped from the fortification works on the frontier.

"Who goes there?"

It's the sentry; a Russian.

Kim gives his name.

"Bring news, Commissar?"

It's Aleksjéi, the son of a moujik, an engineering student.

"To-morrow there will be a battle, Aleksjéi."

"Battle? Hundred Fascists kaput?"

"I don't know how many kaput, Aleksjéi. I don't even know how many alive."

"Salt and tobacco, Commissar."

Salt and tobacco is the Italian phrase which has made most impression on Aleksjéi, he repeats it all the time, like a refrain, a talisman.

"Salt and tobacco, Aleksjéi."

To-morrow there will be a big battle. Kim is serene. "A, b, c," he'll say. Again and again he thinks: "I love you Adriana." That, and that alone, is history.



* * *



CHAPTER TEN

In the dark morning, without a glimmer of light, Dritto's men are moving silently around the barn, preparing to leave. They wrap blankets round their shoulders; it will be cold up on the boulders of the crest before dawn. As they do so they think not of what will happen to themselves but to this blanket they are taking with them. Will they lose it running away, will it be soaked with their blood as they lie dying, or be taken from them by a Fascist and shown round the town as booty? But what does a blanket matter?

Above them, as if the sound came from above the clouds, they can hear the enemy column on the move; big wheels turning on dusty roads without headlights, the tramp of tired men asking their section leader if they still have far to go. Dritto's men talk in whispers as if the column were passing right behind the walls of the barn.

Now they are munching boiled chestnuts out of their billy-cans; no one knows when they will eat next. The cook will be going into action too, this time; he is ladling out the chestnuts, cursing under his breath, his eyes swollen with sleep, and he does not mention revolution any more. Giglia has also got up and is wandering round among the preparations without finding anything useful to do. Every now and again Mancino pauses to glance at her.

"Hey, Giglia," he says, "it's not safe for you to stay here in the camp alone. One never knows."

"Where d'you expect me to go to, then?" asks Giglia.

"Put on your skirt and go to a village, they won't do anything to a woman. Dritto, tell her she can't stay here alone."

Dritto has not eaten any chestnuts, he is directing the men's preparations almost silently, with his collar up. He does not raise his head or reply at once.



* * *



"No," he says eventually, "she'd better stay here."

Giglia glances at her husband as if to say, "You see?" Then the men try to get rid of her, saying, "Out of the way," until finally she goes back to sleep.

Pin is also in everybody's way, like a hunting dog watching its master's preparations.

"A battle," he thinks, trying to excite himself, "now there'll be a battle."

"Well," he says to Giacinto, "which shall I take?"

The commissar takes no notice of him. "What?" he says.

"Which rifle shall I take?" asks Pin.

"You?" exclams Giacinto. "You're not coming."

"Yes, I am."

"Out of the way. This isn't a time to take children along. Dritto doesn't want you to come. Out of the way."

Pin is furious, he'll follow behind them unarmed, jeering at their backs till they turn and shoot at him.

"Dritto, Dritto, is it true you don't want me to come?"

Dritto doesn't reply, he is taking little puffs at a cigarette-end, as if he were biting it.

"There," says Pin, "he says it's not true."

Now I'll get a clip on the back of the head, he thinks. But Dritto says nothing.

"Can I go into action, Dritto?" says Pin.

Dritto smokes.

"Dritto says I can come, did you hear, Giacinto?" exclaims Pin.

Now Dritto will say: "Shut up; you stay here."

Instead of which he says nothing. Why?

Pin says, very loudly, "Then I'm coming."

And he goes towards a place where there are still some unallotted weapons, whistling so as to attract attention to himself. He chooses the lightest rifle.

"Then I'll take this," he says, loudly.

"Does it belong to anyone, this one?"



* * *



No answer. Pin goes back to where he was before, swinging the rifle to and fro by its strap. He sits down on the ground, right in front of Dritto, and begins testing the bolt, the firing-pin, the trigger, crooning: "I have a rifle! I have a rifle!"

Someone shouts: "Quiet! Are you mad?"

The men are getting into single file, squad by squad, group by group; the ammunition bearers arrange their shifts.

"You understand, then," says Dritto, "the detachment will take up position between the pilon on Mount Pellegrino and the second gorge. Cousin will take over command. New orders when we arrive up there."

Now all the men's eyes are on him, sleepy turgid eyes, crossed by locks of hair.

"What about you?" they ask.

Dritto's lowered lids are covered with a slight discharge.

"I'm ill," he says, "I can't come."

There, now everything can just take its course. The men say nothing. "I'm a finished man," thinks Dritto. Now everything can take its course. It's terrible, though, that the men say nothing, make no protest; that means they've already condemned him, are pleased at his refusing this last test. Perhaps they expected it. And yet they cannot understand what it is that makes him do this; neither does he, Dritto, himself. But now everything can take its course, there is nothing for him to do but let himself drift.

Pin, on the other hand, understands everything; he is watching attentively, his tongue between his teeth, his eyes alight. There lies the woman, with that warm breast of hers under the man's shirt, half-buried in the hay. It's hot in the hay and she keeps on turning over. Once at night she got up when everyone was asleep, took off her trousers and got back naked between the blankets. Pin saw her. Yes, astounding things will be happening in the barn while the battle rages in the valley, things a hundred times more exciting. That must



* * *



be why Dritto is allowing Pin to go into action. Pin has dropped the rifle at his feet and is following every movement with his eyes, very attentively. The men continue getting into line; no one tells Pin to do so.

At that moment the hawk begins screeching from the rafters in the roof, flapping its clipped wings as if in sudden desperation.

"Babeuf! I must feed Babeuf!" cries Mancino, and he runs to fetch the sack of entrails. Then the men turn against him and the bird, as if wanting to deflect all their rancour on to something positive.

"Hell take you and your hawk! Filthy bird of ill omen! Some disaster happens every time it opens its mouth! Twist its neck! Twist its neck!"

Mancino faces them with the hawk perched by the claws on his shoulder, feeding it bits of meat and looking at his comrades with hatred. "The hawk's mine, it's nothing to do with you, and I'll take it into action with me if I want to, d'you get that?"

"Twist its neck!" cries Long Zena. "This isn't the time to think of hawks! Twist its neck or we will!"

He tries to grab it, and gets a bite on the back of his hand that draws blood. The hawk's feathers are standing on end, it is spreading its wings and screeching ceaselessly, rolling its yellow eyes.

"There! There! I'm glad!" cries the cook. The men are all standing round him, their beards bristling with rage, their fists raised.

"Shut it up! Shut it up! It brings bad luck! It'll call the Germans down on us!"

Long Zena sucks the blood on his wounded hand.

"Kill it!" he shouts.

Duke, who is carrying the machine-gun, takes a pistol from his belt.

"I'll shoot it! I'll shoot it!" he grunts.



* * *



The hawk, rather than showing any sign of quietening down, is becoming more and more frenzied.

"All right," Mancino suddenly decides. "All right. Just see what I'm going to do. You wanted it."

He has taken the hawk by the neck in both his hands and is now pulling, holding the head between his knees, towards the ground. The men are all silent.

"There. Now you're satisfied. You're all satisfied, now. There."

The hawk is not moving any more, its clipped wings are hanging open, its stiff feathers drooping. Mancino flings it on to a bush, and Babeuf remains hanging there by its wings, with its head down. It gives a last quiver, then dies.

"Into line. All into line and let's go," calls Cousin. "Machine-gunners ahead, ammunition bearers behind. Riflemen last. Let's go."

Pin is standing to one side. He does not get into line. Dritto turns and enters the barn. In silence the men start off along the track leading up into the mountains. Last is Mancino in his sailor's jersey with the bird-droppings all over his shoulders.

Inside the barn the darkness smells of hay. The woman and the man are asleep in opposite corners, wrapped in their blankets. Neither moves. Pin could swear, though, that neither will close an eye again till daybreak. He lies down also, with his eyes open. He will look and listen, and not close an eye either. The two are not even scratching themselves. They are breathing deeply. Yet they are awake, Pin knows that; and gradually he falls asleep.

It is daylight outside when he wakes up. Pin is all alone among trampled straw. Gradually he remembers everything. It's the day of the battle! Why is there no sound of firing? It's the day when the commander will have the cook's wife! Pin gets up and goes out. The sky is so blue it's almost frightening, and so many birds singing they're almost frightening too.



* * *



The kitchen has been set up among the ruins of an old hut. Giglia is inside. She is fanning a small fire under a canful of chestnuts; she looks pale, with dull eyes.

"Pin! D'you want some chestnuts?" she calls with that false motherly air of hers as if she were trying to keep him sweet.

Pin hates women putting on maternal airs; he knows it's all a trick and that they, like his sister, really hate him and are just afraid of him. He hates her.

Has "it" happened? And where is Dritto? He decides to ask her.

"Well; done everything?" he asks.

"What?" exclaims Giglia.

Pin does not reply; he glances at her from half-closed eyes, wrinkling his nose.

"I've just got up," says Giglia, looking angelic.

She understands — thinks Pin — the cow. She's understood.

And yet he has a feeling that nothing definite has happened yet; the woman is looking tense and holding her breath.

Dritto arrives. He's been washing; around his neck is a faded coloured towel. His face looks older, covered with lines and shadows.

"They're not firing yet," he says.

"Hell, Dritto," exclaims Pin. "Have they all fallen asleep?"

Dritto doesn't smile; he is sucking his teeth.

"Has the whole brigade fallen asleep on the crest, d'you think?" says Pin. "And the Germans getting here on tiptoe? Raus! Raus! We turn round and there they are."

Pin points behind Dritto, who turns around. Then he is annoyed with himself for turning, and shrugs his shoulders. He sits down by the fire.

"I'm ill," he says.

"D'you want some chestnuts?" asks Giglia.



* * *



Dritto spits into the cinders.

"My stomach's burning," he says.

"Just drink the juice."

"My stomach's burning."

Then he thinks it over. "All right. Give me some," he says.

He brings the lip of the dirty billy-can to his lips and drinks. Then he puts it down.

"Good. I'm eating," says Pin.

And he begins to suck at the mess of hot chestnuts.

Dritto raises his eyes towards Giglia. His eyelids have long hard lashes on top; the ones underneath are bare.

"Dritto," says the woman.

"Mmm."

"Why didn't you go?"

Pin keeps his face inside the tin and looks at them from above the brim.

"Go where?"

"Into action, of course."

"How can I go anywhere, when I don't know where I am myself!"

"What's wrong, Dritto?"

"What's wrong? I know what's wrong! They've got it in for me at brigade, they've been playing cat and mouse with me for some time. It's always: hey, Dritto we'll talk about this afterwards, now take care, Dritto, think it over, Dritto, be careful . . . Devil take them. I can't stand it any more. If they've something to say to me let them say it. I want to do what I like a bit."

Giglia is sitting a little above him. She gives him a long look, breathing hard through her nostrils.

"I feel I want to do what I like a bit," Dritto tells her, his eyes yellow. He puts a hand on her knee.

Pin is sucking noisily at the empty tin.

"Dritto, suppose they really get at you?"



* * *



Dritto moves nearer her, now he is crouching at her feet.

"I don't mind dying," he says. But his lips are trembling, the lips of a sick boy. "I don't mind dying. But first I'd like . . . First . . ."

His head is turned up and he is looking at Giglia above him.

Pin throws the empty tin on to the ground, with the spoon inside. Dlin! goes the spoon.

Dritto now turns his head towards him, and looks at him, gnawing his lips.

"Eh!" says Pin.

Dritto gives a start.

"They're not firing," he says.

"They're not firing," says Pin.

Dritto gets up, and walks round a little, nervously.

"Go and fetch some water, Pin."

"Right away," says Pin, and bends down to do up his boots.

"You're pale, Giglia," says Dritto. He is standing behind her, with his knees touching her back.

"Perhaps I'm ill too," breathes Giglia.

Pin breaks out into one of his monotonous songs in an endless crescendo: "She's pale! . . . She's pale! . . . She's pale! . . . She's pale! . . ."

The man has put his hands on her cheeks and turned her face up. "Ill like me ... ? Say, ill like me ... ?"

"She's pale! . . . She's pale! . . . She's pale! . . ." sings Pin.

Dritto turns on him with a furious face.

"What about the water?"

"Wait a sec . . ." says Pin. "I'll just do the other up."

And he goes on fiddling with his boots.

"I don't know how you're ill . . ." says Giglia. "How are you ill?"



* * *



Dritto says in a low voice, "So ill I can't stand it any more, can't stand it any more."

Now, still from behind her, he has taken her by the shoulders and is holding his hands under her arm-pits.

"She's pale! . . . She's pale! . . ."

"Pin!"

"Right. I'm off now. Give me the flask."

Then he stops, with a hand to his ear. Dritto also stops, and looks out into the emptiness.

"They're not firing," he says.

"Neh? They're not firing at all . . ." says Pin.

They both stand there silently.

"Pin!"

"I'm going!"

Pin leaves, dangling the flask and whistling the tune he has been singing. There'll be a lot to amuse him to-day. Pin will be quite pitiless; Dritto does not frighten him now he's not in command any more; he'll never command anything again, now he's refused to go into action. Pin's whistling can no longer be heard from the kitchen. He stops, turns round and tiptoes back. No, they're still where they were. Dritto's hands are now under her hair, at the nape of her neck, and she is making cat-like movements as if to avoid them. They turn at once, with a start, sensing his presence.

"Well?" exclaims Dritto.

"I came to fetch the other flask," says Pin. "The straw's undone on this one."

Dritto passes a hand over his forehead. "Here you are."

The woman gets up and goes and sits near the sack of potatoes.

"Well. Let's peel some potatoes; at least we'll be doing something."

She lays an empty sack on the ground and puts potatoes and a couple of knives on it.

"Take a knife, Dritto, here are the potatoes," she says.



* * *



Pin thinks her silly and hypocritical.

Dritto is still passing a hand over his forehead. "They're not firing yet," he says, "I wonder what's happening?"

Pin goes out again; this time he really will go and fetch water. They'll have to be given time, otherwise nothing will ever happen. Near the spring is a bushful of blackberries. Pin settles down to picking and eating them. He likes blackberries, but finds they give him no pleasure now; although he fills his mouth with them he can't taste any flavour. There; now he's eaten enough, he can return. But perhaps it's still too soon; better if he can get something else over first. He crouches down among the bushes. It makes him feel good to force himself and meanwhile think of Dritto and Giglia chasing each other round the ruined hut, or of those prisoners being led out into the darkness and made to kneel down in the graves they've dug themselves, with chattering teeth; evil incomprehensible things, as strangely fascinating to him as his own excrement.

He wipes himself with leaves. He's ready, off he goes.

In the kitchen the potatoes are spilled all over the floor. Giglia is in a corner beyond the sacks and cooking-pots, with a knife in her hand. Her man's shirt is open; Dritto is also standing on the other side of the sacks, and is threatening her with his knife. Yes, they are chasing each other, perhaps they'll wound each other next!

Instead of which, he is laughing; they are both laughing; it's all a game. It's not nice laughter, and the joke seems to hurt them, but they are laughing.

Pin puts down the flask. "The water," he says loudly.

They leave their knives now and come to drink. Dritto takes the flask and gives it to Giglia. Giglia grasps it and drinks, while Dritto looks at her lips.

He says, "They're not firing yet."

Then he turns towards Pin. "They're not firing yet," he repeats. "What on earth's happening down there?"



* * *



Pin is pleased at being asked a question like that, as between equals.

"What d'you think can be happening?" he asks.

Dritto drinks in great gulps, empties the flask down his throat, and never seems to be going to stop. He dries his mouth. "There, Giglia, if you want any more. Drink up if you're thirsty, then we'll send for another."

"If you want me to," says Pin sourly, "I'll bring you a pailful."

They both look at each other and laugh. But Pin realises they're not laughing at what he said; it's a laugh between the two of them, secret, without any reason.

"If you like," says Pin, "I'll bring you enough to bathe in."

They go on looking at each other and laughing.

"To bathe in," repeats the man, and it's difficult now to tell if he's laughing or if his teeth are chattering. "To bathe in, Giglia, to bathe in."

He has taken her by the shoulders. Then suddenly his face darkens and he drops his hands. "Down there," he says, "look down there."

Hanging on a bush, a few yards away, is the dead hawk, dangling on its wings.

"Away with it. Away with the filthy thing," he says, "I don't want to see it any more!"

He takes it up by one of its wings and flings it far into the alpenroses; Babeuf flies off as perhaps he never did in his life. Giglia puts a hand on Dritto's arm. "No, poor Babeuf!"

"Away with it," Dritto is pale with anger. "I don't want to see it any more! Go and bury it, Pin! Pin, go and bury it. Take the spade and bury it, Pin!"

Pin looks at the dead bird in the alpenroses; suppose it gets up, dead though it is, and bites him right between the eyes?

"No, I won't," he says.

Dritto's nostrils quiver; he puts a hand on his pistol.

"Take the spade, Pin, and get going."



* * *



Pin takes the hawk up by a leg; the claws are curved, and hard as nails. He sets off with the spade on his shoulders, carrying the dead bird with its head dangling down. Through the alpenroses and a patch of woodland and he's out in the meadows. Under those meadows rising in gradual slopes up towards the mountains all the dead are buried, with eyes full of earth, dead enemies and dead comrades. And now the hawk as well.

Pin walks over the meadows in curious twists and turns. He doesn't want, when he digs a grave for the bird, to uncover a human face with his spade. He doesn't want to disturb the dead at all, he's afraid of them. And yet it would be fine to dig up a dead body, a dead man with his teeth bare and his eyes empty.

Now Pin can only see mountains around him, and huge valleys with invisible depths, and high rocky slopes black with woods, then mountains again, row after row of them, into the infinite distance. He is alone on the earth. Under the earth are the dead. Beyond the woods and slopes there are other human beings, rubbing themselves against each other, or shooting to kill. At his feet lies the dead hawk. Huge clouds are flying above him in the windswept sky. Pin begins digging out a grave for the dead bird. A small grave is enough; a hawk is not a man. Pin takes it up; its eyes are shut, with bare, almost human-looking lids. If he tried to open one, he would see the round yellow eye beneath. He feels an impulse to fling the hawk into the great empty space above the valley and see its wings open, then watch it rise in flight, circle above his head and fly off towards a distant peak. And then he would follow it as they do in fairy stories, walking over mountains and plains until he reached an enchanted village in which all the inhabitants were good. But instead Pin now puts the hawk down into the grave and rakes earth on it with the tip of the spade.

At that moment an explosion, like a thunderbolt fills the



* * *



valley; shots, bursts, deep bangs, all increased by echoes. The battle! Pin jumps back in terror. Terrible noises lacerate the air very near him, he can't tell where. Soon bullets will be falling right on top of him. Soon the Germans will be appearing on the rocky slopes, bristling with machine-guns, and be on him.

"Dritto!"

Pin runs away. He's left the spade sticking in the earth of the grave. He runs with the lacerating noises exploding all round him.

"Dritto! Giglia!"

There; now he's in the wood. Machine-gun fire, grenades, mortars; the battle has suddenly started out of its sleep and it's impossible to tell where it is; perhaps only a few yards from him; perhaps he'll see machine-guns firing at him at the turn of this path, and dead men lying among the bushes.

"Help! Dritto! Giglia!"

He is out among the alpenroses now. Under the open sky the shooting is more frightening than ever.

"Dritto! Giglia!"

No one in the kitchen. They've escaped! Left him alone!

"Dritto! They're firing! They're firing!"

Pin runs haphazardly among the banks of alpenroses, sobbing. There, in the bushes, is a blanket, a blanket wrapped round a moving human body; one body . . . no, two bodies . . . two pairs of legs are showing . . . twined together.

"The battle! Dritto! They're firing! The battle!"

CHAPTER ELEVEN

The brigade has reached the Pass of the Half-Moon after endless hours of marching. There is a cold night wind blowing which freezes the sweat into the bones; the men are too tired



* * *



to sleep and the commanders order a short halt behind some rocky boulders. In the dim cloudy darkness the pass looks like a concave bowl with its rims wreathed in mist, from which rise the top of two rocky heights. Beyond it lie free plains and valleys, fresh areas not yet occupied by the enemy. The men have not rested since they set off for the battle, yet they show no sign of any of those dangerous collapses which are apt to come suddenly after long strain; the stimulant of battle has not worn off yet.

The battle has been a bloody one and ended in retreat; but it was not lost. The Germans, passing through a defile, had suddenly found the heights around pullulating with shouting men and blazing with firearms; many of them were rolled into the sides of the track, one or two lorries began belching fire and smoke like furnaces and were soon reduced to nothing but black scrap-iron. Reinforcements then came up, but there was little they could do except wipe out a few partisans who had stayed on the road against orders or been cut off in the confusion. For the partisan commanders had been warned in time of the new motorised column approaching, and to avoid being surrounded had withdrawn their men up the mountain paths. The Germans, however, are not people to be put off by a reverse, and Ferriera has decided that the entire brigade is to evacuate the area, which could now become a trap, and move on into other valleys where there were no partisans yet and which could be more easily defended. Now the blackness of the night was left behind as the retreating men wound up, silent and orderly, along a mule path leading to the pass; in the rear came a line of mules carrying rations and ammunition, and the wounded from the battle.

Dritto's men are now chattering with cold behind the boulders; their heads and shoulders are wrapped in blankets, like burnouses. The detachment has had one casualty — the commissar, Giacinto the tinker. He had been hit by a burst



* * *



of German fire and his body lay in a meadow below, rid now of all his dreams of vagabondage and of all his lice too, which no insect powder had ever done. There was also one man slightly wounded in a hand, Count, one of the Calabrian brothers-in-law.

They have now been joined by Dritto, whose yellow face and blanket round his shoulders make him look really ill. Silent, his nostrils quivering, he watches the men one by one. Every now and again he seems on the point of giving some order, then says nothing. The men have not said a word to him yet. If he gave an order, or any of them talked to him, the rest would certainly turn on him, and violent words would fly. But this is not the moment for a show-down; both he and the men realise that by tacit consent, so he avoids giving orders and the men avoid any occasion for them. The detachment has been marching with discipline, and there has been no dispersion or quarrel about shifts; one could never have told it was leaderless. But Dritto is still in fact their leader, he only has to glance at a man to make him straighten up; yes, he has a magnificent leader's temperament, Dritto.

Pin, wrapped up to the eyes in a woollen scarf, is looking at Dritto and Giglia, and from them to Mancino. Their faces seem quite normal, perhaps rather drawn from cold and exhaustion; there is nothing on either of their faces to show what they'd been doing the morning before.

Other detachments pass which are to halt farther on or continue their march.

"Gian! Gian!"

In a squad which has halted nearby, Pin suddenly recognises his old friend from the tavern, Gian the Driver, dressed as a partisan and armed from head to foot. At first he does not realise who is calling him, then he is just as surprised himself: "Oh . . . Pin!"

They greet each other with rather cautious warmth, as people do who are not used to exchanging compliments. Gian



* * *



looks a different man; he has only been with the partisans a week, and his eyes have already lost that look of a cave-dwelling animal, due to smoke and alcohol, which those of the men in the tavern have. He is in Spada's detachment.

"When I joined the brigade Kim wanted to put me in your detachment . . ." says Gian. Pin thinks: He doesn't realise what that means, perhaps the man from the committee that night at the tavern reported badly on all of them.

"Hell, Gian, I wish we were together!" says Pin. "Why didn't they put you with us?"

"They told me it was pointless; your detachment is to be broken up soon!"

There, thinks Pin, he's only just arrived and knows all the latest news about us. Pin, on the other hand, knows nothing about things down in the town. "Gian!" he says, "what's the news from Long Alley? And the tavern?"

Gian looks at him sourly: "Haven't you heard?" he asks.

"No," says Pin, "what is it? Has the Bersagliera had a child?"

Gian spits. "I don't want to hear another word about those people," he says. "I'm ashamed of being born among them. For years I've been fed up to the eyes with them and the tavern, the stink in the Alley . . . And yet I stayed there . . . Now I've been forced to run away I can almost thank the swine who informed on me. . . ."

"Frenchy Michel?" asks Pin.

"Michel was one. But he's not the one who did most. He plays a double game, Michel does, with the Black Brigade and with the Gap; he hasn't properly decided yet which side to be on...."

"And the others ... ?"

"There was a round-up. They were all taken. We'd only just decided to form a Gap . . . Giraffe was shot . . . The others taken to Germany . . . The Alley's almost emptied ... A bomb from an aeroplane fell near the bakery; everyone



* * *



has either evacuated or is living in the tunnel . . . It's another life here; I feel as if I were back in Croatia, only now, thank God, I'm on the other side. . . ."

"In Croatia, Gian, what on earth did you find in Croatia, a mistress? And my sister, tell me, has she been evacuated too?"

Gian strokes his newly growing beard: "Your sister," he says, "has made others evacuate, the cow."

"Explain yourself," says Pin, acting the buffoon. "You're offending me, you know."

"Idiot! Your sister is in the S.S., and wears silk dresses and goes driving round with officers! When the Germans came to the Alley, she was the one who led them from house to house, arm-in-arm with a German captain!"

"A captain, Gian! She has got on in the world!"

"Are you talking about women informers?" This is said by Cousin, who is thrusting his big face with its flattened nose and its sprouting moustaches towards them.

"Yes, that bitch of a sister of mine," says Pin. "She's been a spy and sneak ever since she was a child. This was to be expected."

"It was to be expected," says Cousin, looking into the distance with that disconsolate expression of his, from under the woollen cap.

"It was to be expected of Frenchy Michel too," says Gian, "but he's not really bad, Michel isn't, he's just a rascal."

"And Pelle, d'you know the new one in the Black Brigade, Pelle?"

"Pelle!" exclaims Gian the Driver. "He's the worst of the lot."

"He was the worst," says a voice behind them. They turn round; it's Red Wolf arriving, hung all over with weapons and machine-gun belts captured from the Germans. They greet him warmly; everyone is pleased to see Red Wolf again.

"Why, what's happened to Pelle? How did it go?"



* * *



Red Wolf says, "The Gap organised it all," and he begins telling them what happened.

Pelle used sometimes to go and sleep at his own home, and not in barracks. He lived by himself in the attic of a tenement block, where he kept the whole armoury of weapons which he'd managed to lay hands on, for if he'd taken them to barracks he'd have had to share them with his companions. One night Pelle was on his way home, armed as always. A man was following him, dressed in civilian clothes and wearing a raincoat. Whenever Pelle saw someone he didn't like the look of, he soon asked for their papers. He stopped, but did not turn round. The other had stopped too, with his hands in his pockets. Pelle felt himself covered by a firearm. "Better pretend not to notice," he thought, and went on walking. On the other pavement there was another man he'd never seen before, also in a raincoat, walking along with his hands in his pockets. Pelle turned and the pair turned too. "I must get home as quickly as possible," he thought. "As soon as I reach the street door I'll jump inside and begin firing from behind the doorposts to keep them off." But beyond the street door, on the pavement, was another man in a raincoat, coming towards him. "Better let him pass," thought Pelle. He stopped and the men in the raincoats stopped too, all three of them. The only thing to do was reach the street door as soon as possible. In the entrance, back against the stair rails, were another two men in raincoats, standing there motionless with their hands in their pockets. Pelle had already entered. "Now they've got me in a trap," he thought. "Now they'll say: 'Hands up!' " But they did not seem to be looking at him. "If they still follow me," he thought, "I'll turn on the stairs and fire down between the rails." When he reached the second flight he looked down. They were following; Pelle was still covered by the invisible weapons in the pockets of their raincoats. Another landing; Pelle frowned down. On each flight of stairs below him was a man coming up. Pelle went on



* * *



climbing, keeping very close to the wall, but at whatever point of the stairs he'd reached, there was always a man of the Gap, one or two or three or four flights below him, coming up close to the wall, and keeping him covered. Six floors, seven floors. The well of the staircase in the dim light of the black-out looked like a series of mirrors, with a man in a raincoat repeated numberless times on every flight, spiralling slowly up towards him. "If they don't fire at me before I reach the attic," thought Pelle, "I'm safe; I'll barricade myself inside and I've got enough weapons and grenades there to resist till the Black Brigade arrives." Now he had reached the last floor under the roof. Pelle ran up the last flight, opened his frontdoor, entered and banged it to behind him. "I'm safe," he thought. But on the roof, through the windows of the attic, he saw a man in a raincoat aiming a pistol at him. Pelle raised his hands. The door opened behind him. From the stair rails on the landings all the men in raincoats were aiming pistols at him. Then one of them, no one knows who, fired.

The men halted at the pass are all standing round Red Wolf, following the story breathlessly. Red Wolf sometimes exaggerates a little in his stories, but he tells them very well.

One of them says: "What about you, Red Wolf, which of these men were your?"

Red Wolf smiles, and raises his peaked cap on his shaven skull. "The one on the roof," he says.

He then describes all the weapons Pelle had collected up there; stens, tommy-guns, hand-grenades, pistols of every make and calibre. There was even a mortar, says Red Wolf.

"Look," he says, and shows them a pistol and some special hand grenades. "This is all I took, the Gaf have less weapons than we have, and need them."

Pin suddenly remembers his pistol. If Pelle knew the place and went and fetched it, it must have been among those; and now he, Pin, had a right to it, it was his, and no one could take it from him!



* * *



"Red Wolf, listen, Red Wolf?" he says, pulling him by the jacket. "Was there a P.38 among Pelle's pistols?"

"A P.38?" replies the other. "No, there wasn't a P.38. He had every type in the collection, but not a P.38." And he goes on describing the variety and rarity of the weapons collected by the maniac Pelle.

"Are you quite sure there wasn't a P.38?" asks Pin. "Could someone from the Gap have taken it?"

"No, no, d'you think I wouldn't have noticed a P.38? We went through them all together."

Then the pistol must still be buried under the spiders' nests, thinks Pin; it's still mine, Pelle didn't know the place, no one knows that magic place but me. This reassures him greatly. Whatever happens, there are still the spiders' nests and the buried pistol.

It is nearly dawn. The brigade still has many hours of marching in front of it, but the leaders consider that lines of men filing along open paths after sunrise would give away their new positions, and decide to wait until the following night before continuing their march in complete secrecy.

This is a frontier area, where for many years the Fascists had been playing at preparing a war which in the end they entered completely unprepared; and the mountains are scattered with a variety of long low military buildings. Ferriera now sends orders for the detachments to scatter round these huts to sleep and keep hidden for the whole of next day, till it is dark or misty enough to start marching again.

Places are assigned to the various units; Dritto's detachment is allotted a small isolated building made of cement, with rings in the walls; it must have been a stable. The men stretch themselves out on a few bits of rotten straw on the floor and close their tired eyes, filled with scenes of battle.

In the morning they find it a nuisance having to stay cooped up in there, and only being able to go out one by one to make water behind a wall; but at least they can rest. They



* * *



are not allowed to sing, or make any smoke from cooking; down at the bottom of the valley there are villages full of spies, with binoculars trained and ears stretched for any sound. The men have to go and cook in shifts at a military kitchen with an underground flue which comes out some way off.

Pin does not know what to do with himself; he has sat down in a patch of sun at the door and taken off his broken boots and now completely heelless socks. He looks at his feet in the sun, rubs his blisters, and takes the dirt from between his toes. Then he searches for lice; a daily round-up is necessary if he is not to end up like Giacinto, poor old Giacinto. But what is the use of catching lice if one's going to die one day, like Giacinto? Perhaps the reason that Giacinto didn't rid himself of them was that he knew he was going to die. Pin is sad. The first time he caught lice in a shirt was with Pietro-magro in prison. Pin wishes he were reopening the cobbler's in the Alley with Pietromagro. But it must be deserted now, the Alley, with everyone run away or taken prisoner or killed, and only that bitch of a sister of his left going round with captains. Pin feels that soon he will find himself abandoned all alone in an unknown world, without any idea where to go. The men of the detachment are an ambiguous stand-offish lot, like the men of the tavern, though much more fascinating and incomprehensible, with that lust to kill in their eyes, and that bestial coupling in the alpenroses. The only one he feels at home with is Cousin, but he's not here now; in the morning on waking up Pin found he had gone, with his woollen cap and his tommy-gun, off on one of his mysterious expeditions. And now the detachment will be broken up, too. Kim and Gian the Driver had said so. The others know nothing about this so far. Pin turns to them as they lie crowded up against each other on the scanty straw on the cement floor.

"God, if I didn't come and give you news, you wouldn't even know you were born."

"What's up now? Spit it out," they say.



* * *



"The detachment is to be broken up," he says, "as soon as we get to the new area."

"Get on with you. Who said so?"

"Kim. I swear."

Dritto shows no sign of having heard. He knows what this means.

"Don't talk balls, Pin. Where can they send us?"

They begin to discuss the detachments to which the various men could be assigned, and which they would prefer to go to.

"Don't you know they're going to make a special detachment for each, though?" says Pin. "They'll make all of you commanders. Long Zena they'll make commander of the chair-borne partisans. Sure, a detachment of partisans who go into action sitting down. There are soldiers mounted on horses, aren't there? Now they'll have partisans mounted on rocking-chairs!"

"Wait till I've finished reading," says Long Zena, holding a finger in his Super-Thriller to keep the place. "Then I'll answer you. I'm just on the point of guessing the murderer."

"The murderer of the bull?" asks Pin.

Long Zena can no longer follow either his book or the conversation.

"What bull?"

Pin breaks out into one of his high-pitched laughs; Long Zena has fallen into his trap. "The bull you got the lips from! Bull's-lips! Bull's-lips!"

Long Zena leans over on one of his huge hands to get up, still keeping his place, and waves the other about in an attempt to grab Pin; then he realises it's not worth the effort and begins reading again.

The men all laugh at Pin's jokes; they are enjoying themselves; when Pin starts making fun of people he goes right through the lot of them.

Pin, gay and excited, laughs till the tears come into his



* * *



eyes; he's in his element, now, right among the grown-ups, people who are enemies and friends at the same time, whom he can laugh at till he has vented his hatred for them. He feels ruthless; he'll hurt them without any pity.

Giglia laughs too, but Pin knows that it's a forced laugh; she is frightened. Pin glances at her now and again; she does not lower her eyes, but the smile is trembling on her lips; you wait, thinks Pin, you won't be laughing long.

"Carabiniere!" exclaims Pin. At every new name he brings in, the men give subdued grins, enjoying in anticipation what Pin will come out witih.

"Carabiniere will be given a special detachment . . ." begins Pin.

"To keep order with," says Carabiniere, defensively.

"No, my lad, to arrest parents with!"

Every time Carabiniere is reminded of that business of the conscript's parents, it makes him furious.

"It's not true! I never arrested any of their parents!"

Pin's voice is full of subdued, concentrated irony; the men are listening with approval, backing him up. "Now don't get angry, lad, don't get angry. A detachment to arrest parents with . . . You're so good at arresting parents!"

Carabiniere is getting more and more furious; then suddenly he thinks it might be better to let Pin have his say, till he tires and passes on to someone else.

"Now we'll go on to . . ." Pin swivels his eyes round, then stops with his face set in one of those smiles which bare his gums and cover his eyes with freckles. The men have already guessed who he is referring to, and hold back their laughter. Duke seems almost hypnotised by Pin's grin, his moustache standing straight up and his cheeks are drawn.

". . . there'll be a special detachment for Duke too . . . to gut rabbits. God, you boast so much, Duke, and I've never seen you do anything more than twist chickens' necks and skin rabbits!"



* * *



Duke puts a hand on his Austrian pistol and looks as if he's going to gore him with his fur cap. "I'll cccut your ggguts out!" he shouts.

Then Mancino makes a false move. He says: "And what shall we put Pin in charge of?"

Pin looks at Mancino as if noticing him for the first time. "Oh, Mancino, you're back, are you ... ? You've been away from home so long . . . Lots of exciting things have happened while you were away . . ."

He turns round slowly; Dritto is in a corner, looking serious; Giglia is near the door with that hypocritical smile of hers always on her lips.

"Guess what detachment you'll be in charge of, Mancino . . ."

Mancino gives his sour laugh and tries to forestall him: "A cooking-pot detachment . . ." he says, and doubles up with laughter, as if he had made the wittiest joke in the world.

Pin shakes his head, with a serious face. Mancino blinks ... "a hawk detachment . . ." he says, and tries to laugh again, but only makes a strange sound in his throat.

Pin shakes his head again.

"... a naval detachment . . ." says Mancino, and now his mouth has not opened, and there are tears in his eyes.

Pin now puts on a clownish hypocritical expression, and says slowly and unctuously: "Well, your detachment won't be so very different from others. Except that it'll only be able to move about in the open, along wide roads, and in places where there's nothing growing higher than bushes."

Mancino begins laughing again, first silently then louder and louder; he has not yet realised what Pin is getting at, but is laughing all the same. The men are now hanging on Pin's lips, some of them have already understood and are grinning.

"It'll be able to go anywhere, except in the woods . . . except where there are branches . . . where there are branches . . ."



* * *



"Woods . . . Ha, ha, ha . . . Branches," laughs Mancino. "Why though ... ?"

"It would get stuck . . . your detachment would . . . get stuck by the horns!"

The others burst into roars of laughter. The cooks gets up, looking sour, his mouth contracted. The laughter drops a little. The cook looks round, then begins laughing himself again, with swollen eyes and twisted mouth, a forced, sullen laugh, and clapping his hands on his knees and pointing to Pin as if to say: "That's a good one . . ."

"Pin . . . take a look at him . . ." he says, grinning falsely now. "Pin . . . we'll give him the lavatory detachment, that's what we'll give him . . ."

Dritto has now got up too.

He takes a step or two towards them. "Stop all this nonsense," he says sharply. "Don't you realise you mustn't make any noise?"

It is the first time since the battle that he has given an order. And he gives it on the excuse that they are not supposed to make any noise, instead of saying: "Stop all this nonsense because I don't like it."

The men give him sour looks; he is no longer their commander, this man.

Giglia's voice is now heard: "Pin, why don't you sing us a song, instead . . . Sing us the one . . ."

"The lavatory detachment . . ." croaks Mancino. "With a po on your head . . . Ha, ha, ha . . . Pin with a po on his head, imagine it. . . ."

"What would you like me to sing you, Giglia?" says Pin. "The same one as . . . ?"

"Shut up," says Dritto. "Don't you know the orders? Don't you know we're in a danger zone?"

"Sing us that song . . ." says Giglia. "The one you do so well . . . How does it go? Oili, Oilà . . ."

"With a po on his head," the cook is still laughing and



* * *



clapping his knees, though there are tears of rage at the corners of his eyes. "And an enema-tube as a gun ... A burst of enema-tubes, you'll give, Pin . . ."

"Oili, Oilà, Giglia, are you sure ... ?" says Pin. "I've never heard of any songs that go 'Oili, Oilà', there aren't any

..."

"Bursts of enema-tubes . . . Look at him . . . Pin," croaks the cook.

"Oili, Oilà," Pin begins improvising. "The husband goes to war, oilir oilor, and leaves his wife at home, oilim oilom!"

"Pin is a little pimp, oilir oilimp!" shouts Mancino, trying to drown Pin's voice.

Dritto sees that for the first time no one is obeying him. He grabs Pin's arm and begins twisting it: "Shut up! Shut up! D'you understand?"

Pin feels the pain but goes on singing: "Oiler, oiler, the wife and the commander, oili oiloo, what will he do?"

Dritto is now twisting both Pin's arms, feeling the little bones under his fingers; he'll break them in a second, if he goes on. "Shut up, you little bastard, shut up!"

Pin's eyes are full of tears; he is biting his lips: "Oili oilo, to the bushes they go, oili oilogs, like a pair of dogs!"

Dritto drops one of Pin's arms and puts a hand over his mouth. It is a foolish, dangerous thing to do. Pin sinks his teeth into a finger and bites with all his might. Dritto gives a lacerating scream. Pin drops the finger and looks round. They all have their eyes on him, these incomprehensible swine of grown-ups; Dritto is sucking his bleeding finger, Mancino is laughing hysterically, Giglia is looking ashen, and all the others are following the scene breathlessly with glittering eyes.

"Swine!" shouts Pin, breaking into sobs. "Bastards! Bitches!"

The only thing for him now is to escape. Get right away. He must be alone. Pin runs outside.

Dritto is shouting after him: "No one is to leave the



* * *



camp! Come back, Pin, come back!" and makes as if to run after him.

But at the door he bumps into two armed men.

"Dritto, we were looking for you."

Dritto recognises them. They are two runners from brigade headquarters.

"Kim and Ferriera want to see you. To report. Come with us."

Dritto becomes impassive again. "Let's go," he says, and picks up his tommy-gun.

"Unarmed, they said," the men explain.

Dritto does not flicker an eyelid; he takes the strap off his shoulder.

"Let's go," he says.

"And the pistol too," say the men.

Dritto loosens his belt and lets the pistol fall to the ground.

"Let's go," he says.

Now he is standing between the two men.

He turns round: "Our turn to fetch the rations is at two o'clock. Begin getting everything ready. At half-past three, two of our men must go on sentry duty, beginning from where the last night's roster broke off."

He turns round again and walks off between the two men.

CHAPTER TWELVE

Pin is sitting all alone on a mountain crest; sheer away at his feet drop rocky slopes furry with bushes, and then valley folding into valley down to where black rivers coil in the depths. Long wisps of cloud are moving up the slopes and blotting out the scattered villages and trees.



* * *



Something irreparable has happened to Pin now — as irreparable as when he stole the pistol from the sailor, or left the men in the tavern, or escaped from prison. Never again will he be able to return to the detachment, never will he be able to go into action with them now. It is sad to be like him, a child in a world of grown-ups, always treated as an amusement or a nuisance; and never to be able to use those exciting and mysterious things, weapons and women, never to be able to take part in their games. But one day Pin will be grown-up too, and be able to behave really badly to everyone, revenge himself on those who have behaved badly to him; how Pin would like to be grown-up now, or rather not grown-up, but as he is yet admired and feared, a child and yet a leader of grown-ups on some marvellous enterprise.

Now he will leave these windswept unknown parts and go far away, back to his own kingdom in the river-bed, back to the magic spot where the spiders make their nests. Down there his pistol is buried, with that mysterious name; pee thirty-eight. With his pistol Pin will become a partisan all on his own, with no one to twist his arm till it nearly breaks, no one to send him off to bury dead hawks so that a man and woman can roll about together among alpenroses. He will do wonderful things, will Pin, always on his own; kill an officer, a captain, the captain who goes round with that bitch and spy of a sister. Then he will be respected by all the grown-ups, and they will want him to go into action with them; perhaps they will teach him how to handle a machine-gun. And Giglia will no longer say: "Sing us a song, Pin," just so that she can snuggle up against her lover; Giglia won't have lovers any more, and one day she will let her breast be touched by him, by Pin, that warm rosy breast under its man's shirt.

Now Pin is walking with long strides along the paths winding down the mountainside from the Pass of the Half-Moon; he has a long way to go. And as he walks along he begins to feel that his enthusiasm for those projects was



* * *



forced, not genuine at all, that they were just fantasies which would never come about in reality, and that he would go on being a poor lost wandering child forever.

Pin walks for the whole day long. He passes places where lovely games could be played, with big white stones to jump about on and twisted trees to climb; he sees squirrels on the tops of pine-trees, snakes winding through the undergrowth, all good targets for stones. But Pin feels no desire to play any games, and goes on walking as hard as he can go, with the sadness clouding in his throat.

He passes a cottage and stops to ask for something to eat. It is inhabited by an old couple who keep goats. The two old folk greet him kindly, offer him chestnuts and milk, and talk about their sons who are all prisoners-of-war far away; then they sit round the fire and begin saying the Rosary, asking Pin to join in too.

But Pin is not used to dealing with people who are good and feels ill at ease — nor is he used to saying the Rosary; so while the old couple are murmuring away with closed eyes he quietly gets down from his chair and goes off.

That night he digs himself a hole in a haystack and sleeps in it; in the morning he presses on, into areas that are becoming more dangerous, infested by Germans. But Pin realises how useful it sometimes is to be a child, and how no one would believe him even if he said quite openly that he was a partisan.

At one point he finds the way barred by a block post. From some way off he can see Germans frowning at him under their helmets. Pin goes boldly up to them.

"My sheep," he says. "Have you seen my sheep?"

"Was?" The Germans can't understand.

"Sheep. She-e-e-p. Ba-a-a-a-a . . ."

The Germans laugh; they have understood. With that long hair and the mud coating him Pin might easily be a little shepherd-boy.

"I've lost a sheep," he whines. "It must have passed this



* * *



way, for sure. Where's it gone to?" And Pin nips under the barrier and walks on, calling out, "Ba-a-a-a . . ." "He's got away with that too.

The sea, which yesterday looked just a turbid mass of cloud on the edge of the sky, is now becoming a darkening strip of colour and then a great blue background to the hills and houses.

Pin reaches his own river bed. It's an evening with very few frogs about. Black midges are setting the water in the puddles aquiver. There, beyond the bamboos, begins the path of the spiders' nests, the magic place which only Pin knows. There he can weave strange spells, become a king, a god. He starts walking up the path, his heart in his mouth. Yes, there are the nests. But the earth is disturbed, some hand seems to have pased over it all, tearing up the grass, moving the stones, destroying the nests and breaking open their little doors; Pelle! Pelle knew the place; he's been here, with those lips of his slobbering with rage, scooped the loose earth out with his hands, pushed sticks into the tunnels and killed all the spiders one by one, looking for the pee thirty-eight pistol! Did he find it? Pin can no longer recognise the place; the stones he had laid are no longer there, the grass is torn out in handfuls. This should be the place though, the hole he scooped out for it is still there, but now it's full of earth and bits of stone.

Pin puts his head in his hands and sobs. No one will ever give him his pistol back now. Pelle is dead and did not have it among his weapons; where could he have put it, who could he have given it to? The pistol was the last thing Pin had in all the world; what is he to do now? He can't go back to the partisans; he has behaved too badly to all of them, Mancino, Giglia, Duke, Long Zena. There has been a roundup at the tavern and everyone there is deported or killed. The only one left is Frenchy Michel, in the Black Brigade. But Pin does not want to end up like Pelle, climbing up a long



* * *



staircase waiting to be shot at. He is alone in all the world,

is Pin.

* * *

The Dark Girl of Long Alley is trying on a new blue dress, when she hears a knock at the door. She listens; these days she is afraid of opening her door to people she doesn't know, when she's in her old home in the Alley.

"Who's there?"

"Open up, Rina. It's your brother, Pin."

Rina opens the door and her brother comes in, dressed in strange muddy clothes, with a shock of hair wider than his shoulders, filthy, ragged, his boots falling to bits, his cheeks clotted with dust and tears.

"Pin! Where on earth have you come from? Where have you been all this time?"

Pin enters without looking at her, and says hoarsely: "Now don't begin worrying me. I've been to places I wanted to go to. Have you anything to eat?"

The Dark Girl becomes all maternal: "Wait a minute and I'll get something ready. Sit down. How tired you look, poor Pin. You're lucky to have found me at home. I'm scarcely ever here nowadays. I live at the hotel now."

Pin begins chewing bread and a piece of German ersatz chocolate made with groundnuts.

"They treat you well, I see."

"Pin, I've been so worried about you! What have you been doing all this time? Being a vagabond, a rebel?"

"And you?" asks Pin.

The Dark Girl is spreading slices of bread with German ersatz jam and passing them to him.

"And what are you going to do now, Pin?"

"I don't know. Let me eat."

"Look here, Pin, you must try and be sensible. You know, at the place I work they need bright lads like you and could



* * *



look after you well. There's no real work; just going round all day, watching people."

"Say, Rina, have you any weapons?"

"Me?"

"Yes, you."

"Well, I've got a pistol. I keep it with me because one never knows these days. Someone from the Black Brigade gave it to me."

Pin raises his eyes and swallows down the last mouthful. "Will you show it to me, Rina?"

The Dark Girl gets up. 'Why are vou so fixed on pistols? Didn't you have enough of them when you stole Frick's? This one is like Frick's. Here it is. Poor Frick, they've sent him over to the Atlantic coast."

Pin looks at the pistol, fascinated. It's a pee thirty-eight. His pee thirty-eight!

"Who gave it to you?"

"I told you, someone in the Black Brigade. A blond boy; he had such a cold. And without exaggeration he must have had at least seven different pistols on him. What d'you do with so many?' I asked. 'Give me one,' I said. But he didn't want to, however much I begged him. A mania for pistols, he had. Finally he gave me this one because it was in the worst condition. But it works quite well. What's this you're giving me,' I said, 'a cannon?' And he said, 'All right, then it's all in the family.' I wonder what he meant."

Pin is not even listening any more; he is turning his pistol over and over in his hand. Then he raises his eyes to his sister, hugging the pistol to his chest as if it were a doll, and says hoarsely, "Listen to me, Rina, this pistol's mine!"

The Dark Girl gives him a black look. 'What's got hold of you? Have you become a rebel?"

Pin takes up a chair and flings it on the ground.

"Cow!" he shouts with all his strength. "Bitch! Spy!"



* * *



He thrusts the pistol into a pocket and bangs the door on

his way out.

* * *

Outside it is already night. The Alley is deserted, like when he came. The shutters of the shops are up. There are shrapnel shelters against the walls, made of planks and sandbags.

Pin takes the path to the river-bed. He feels as if he were back at that night when he stole the pistol. Now he has his pistol, but everything is just as it was; he is alone in all the world, and lonelier than ever. And Pin's heart is overflowing with a single question, as it was that night: 'What shall I do?"

He walks along the irrigation channels, weeping. First he cries silently then breaks out into loud sobs. There is no one coming towards him now, as there was before. Isn't there? No one? A big shadow is falling on a turn of the channel.

"Cousin!"

"Pin!"

These are enchanted places, where magical things always happen. The pistol is enchanted too, like a magic wand. And Cousin is also like a great magician, with his tommy-gun and his woollen cap, as he puts a hand on Pin's shoulder and asks: "Well, Pin, what are you doing down here?"

"I came to fetch my pistol. Look. A German naval pistol."

Cousin looks at it closely.

"Lovely. A P.38. Look after it carefully."

"And you, what are you doing here, Cousin?"

Cousin sighs, with that eternally regretful air of his, as if he were always doing some penance.

"I'm going to pay a visit," he says.

"These places are mine, down here. Magic places. Spiders make their nests here."

"Do spiders make nests, Pin?"



* * *



"This is the only place in the whole world where they do," explains Pin, "and I'm the only person who knows it. Then that Fascist Pelle came and mucked everything up. Would you like me to show you?"

"Yes, show me, Pin. Spiders' nests, just fancy."

Pin takes him by his big hand, soft and warm as bread.

"There, you see, here there were lots of doors into their little tunnels. That Fascist swine broke them all up. Here is a complete one still, d'you see?"

Cousin has knelt down nearby and is peering into the darkness. "Look, look, a little door that opens and shuts. And a tunnel inside. Is it deep?"

"Very deep," explains Pin, "with bits of grass stuck all round the sides. The spider is at the end."

"Let's light a match," says Cousin.

They both kneel down, side by side, watching the mouth of the tunnel by the light of the match.

"Here, throw the match inside," says Pin, "let's see if the spider comes out."

"Why, poor little thing?" says Cousin. "Don't you see how much harm has been done to them already?"

"Say, Cousin, d'you think they'll remake their nests?"

"Yes, I think so, if we leave them in peace."

"Shall we come back another time and see?"

"Yes, Pin, we'll pass by this way every month and have a look."

How wonderful it is to have found Cousin, who is interested in spiders' nests.

"Say, Pin."

"Yes, Cousin?"

"Say, Pin, there's something I want to tell you. I know you understand these things. You see, it's months and months since I've been with a woman. . . . You understand these things, Pin. Listen, they say that your sister . . ."

Pin is grinning his old grin; he is the grown-ups' friend,



* * *



is Pin; yes, he understands these things and is willing to help out his friends about them when he can. "Hell, Cousin, you'll be all right with my sister. I'll show you the way. D'you know Long Alley? Well, it's the door after the carpenter's, about half way up. Don't worry, you won't meet anyone in the street. But be a bit careful with her. Don't say who you are, nor that I sent you. Tell her you work at the 'Todt' and are just passing through. Ha, Cousin, yet you're always talking against women. Go on, then, she's dark, my sister is, and men like her a lot."

A slight smile passes over Cousin's big disconsolate features.

"Thank you, Pin. You're a real friend. I'll be back soon."

"God, Cousin, are you taking your tommy-gun with you?"

Cousin passes a finger over his moustaches.

"Well, you see, I don't like going around unarmed."

Cousin seems so embarrassed about this that it makes Pin laugh. "Here, take my pistol. Leave me the tommy-gun and I'll keep guard over it."

Cousin puts down the tommy-gun, thrusts the pistol into his pocket, then takes off his woollen cap and puts that into his pocket too. Then he tries to tidy his hair with two fingers wet with spittle.

"You're making yourself look your best, I see, Cousin. You want to make an impression. Be quick, now, if you want to find her at home."

"See you soon, Pin," says Cousin, and off he goes.

Now Pin is alone in the darkness, by the spiders' nests, with the tommy-gun on the ground near him. But he is no longer in despair. He has found Cousin, and Cousin is the great friend he has sought for so long, the friend who is interested in spiders' nests. Yet Cousin is like all other grownups, with that mysterious desire for women, and now he has gone to visit his sister and is embracing her on the unmade



* * *



bed. Thinking it over, Pin decides that it would have been nicer if Cousin had not thought of that, and stayed there instead looking at the spiders' nests a little longer, and made his usual remarks against women which Pin approved and understood so perfecdy. Instead of which Cousin is like all other grown-ups; there's nothing to be done about it, Pin understands these things.

Shots, down in the Old Town. Who can it be? Patrols, perhaps, on their rounds. Shots, at night like that, are always frightening. Cousin was really rather rash to go alone into that nest of Fascists, for a woman. Pin is worried he may fall into the hands of a patrol, or find his sister's room full of Germans and get captured. Deep down, though, Pin feels that would be only just. What pleasure can he get from going with that hairy frog of a sister of his?

But if Cousin is captured, Pin would be all alone, alone with that tommy-gun which frightens him and he doesn't know how to handle. He hopes Cousin won't be captured, he hopes it with all his might, not because Cousin is the Great Friend he was looking for, no, he's not that any more, he's just a man like all the others, but because he is the last person Pin has left in all the world.

He needn't begin worrying, though, for some time, he must wait. Instead of which he now sees a shadow coming nearer, and there he is already.

"How ever were you so quick, Cousin, have you already done it?"

Cousin shakes his head with that disconsolate air of his.

"No. You know, I got disgusted and came away without doing anything."

"Hell, Cousin, you got disgusted?"

Pin is delighted. He really is the Great Friend, Cousin is, he understands everything; even how filthy women are.

Cousin puts the tommy-gun back on his shoulder and hands the pistol back to Pin.



* * *



They walk off into the country, with Pin holding Cousin's big soft calming hand.

The darkness is punctured with tiny spots of light; numberless fireflies are flickering over the hedges.

"Filthy creatures, women, Cousin . . ." says Pin.

"All of them . . ." agrees Cousin. "But they weren't always; now my mother . . ."

"Can you remember your mother, then?" asks Pin.

"Yes, she died when I was fifteen," says Cousin.

"Was she nice?"

"Yes," says Cousin, "she was nice."

"Mine was nice too," says Pin.

"What a lot of fireflies," says Cousin.

"If you look at them really closely, the fireflies," says Pin, "they're filthy creatures too, reddish."

"Yes," says Cousin, "I've never seen them looking so beautiful."

And they walk on, the big man and the child, into the night, amid the fireflies, holding each other by the hand.

THE END





[1]

You are about to begin reading Italo Calvino's new novel, If on a winter's night a traveler. Relax. Concentrate. Dispel every other thought. Let the world around you fade. Best to close the door; the TV is always on in the next room. Tell the others right away, "No, I don't want to watch TV!" Raise your voice—they won't hear you otherwise—"I'm reading! I don't want to be disturbed!" Maybe they haven't heard you, with all that racket; speak louder, yell: "I'm beginning to read Italo Calvino's new novel!" Or if you prefer, don't say anything; just hope they'll leave you alone.

Find the most comfortable position: seated, stretched out, curled up, or lying flat. Flat on your back, on your side, on your stomach. In an easy chair, on the sofa, in the rocker, the deck chair, on the hassock. In the hammock, if you have a hammock. On top of your bed, of course, or in the bed. You can even stand on your hands, head down, in the yoga position. With the book upside down, naturally.

Of course, the ideal position for reading is something you can never find. In the old days they used to read standing up, at a lectern. People were accustomed to standing on their feet, without moving. They rested like that when they were tired of horseback riding. Nobody ever thought of reading on horseback; and yet now, the idea of sitting in the saddle, the book propped against the horse's mane, or maybe tied to the horse's ear with a special harness, seems attractive to you. With your feet in the stirrups, you should feel quite comfortable for reading; having your feet up is the first condition for enjoying a read.

Well, what are you waiting for? Stretch your legs, go ahead and put your feet on a cushion, on two cushions, on



* * *



the arms of the sofa, on the wings of the chair, on the coffee table, on the desk, on the piano, on the globe. Take your shoes off first. If you want to, put your feet up; if not, put them back. Now don't stand there with your shoes in one hand and the book in the other.

Adjust the light so you won't strain your eyes. Do it now, because once you're absorbed in reading there will be no budging you. Make sure the page isn't in shadow, a clotting of black letters on a gray background, uniform as a pack of mice; but be careful that the light cast on it isn't too strong, doesn't glare on the cruel white of the paper, gnawing at the shadows of the letters as in a southern noonday. Try to foresee now everything that might make you interrupt your reading. Cigarettes within reach, if you smoke, and the ashtray. Anything else? Do you have to pee? All right, you know best.

It's not that you expect anything in particular from this particular book. You're the sort of person who, on principle, no longer expects anything of anything. There are plenty, younger than you or less young, who live in the expectation of extraordinary experiences: from books, from people, from journeys, from events, from what tomorrow has in store. But not you. You know that the best you can expect is to avoid the worst. This is the conclusion you have reached, in your personal life and also in general matters, even international affairs. What about books? Well, precisely because you have denied it in every other field, you believe you may still grant yourself legitimately this youthful pleasure of expectation in a carefully circumscribed area like the field of books, where you can be lucky or unlucky, but the risk of disappointment isn't serious.

So, then, you noticed in a newspaper that If on a winter's night a traveler had appeared, the new book by Italo Calvino, who hadn't published for several years. You went to the bookshop and bought the volume. Good for you.

In the shop window you have promptly identified the



* * *



cover with the title you were looking for. Following this visual trail, you have forced your way through the shop past the thick barricade of Books You Haven't Read, which were frowning at you from the tables and shelves, trying to cow you. But you know you must never allow yourself to be awed, that among them there extend for acres and acres the Books You Needn't Read, the Books Made For Purposes Other Than Reading, Books Read Even Before You Open Them Since They Belong To The Category Of Books Read Before Being Written. And thus you pass the outer girdle of ramparts, but then you are attacked by the infantry of the Books That If You Had More Than One Life You Would Certainly Also Read But Unfortunately Your Days Are Numbered. With a rapid maneuver you bypass them and move into the phalanxes of the Books You Mean To Read But There Are Others You Must Read First, the Books Too Expensive Now And You'll Wait Till They're Remaindered, the Books ditto When They Come Out In Paperback, Books You Can Borrow From Somebody, Books That Everybody's Read So It's As If You Had Read Them, Too. Eluding these assaults, you come up beneath the towers of the fortress, where other troops are holding out:

the Books You've Been Planning To Read For Ages,

the Books You've Been Hunting For Years Without Success,

the Books Dealing With Something You're Working On At The Moment,

the Books You Want To Own So They'll Be Handy Just In Case,

the Books You Could Put Aside Maybe To Read This Summer,

the Books You Need To Go With Other Books On Your Shelves,

the Books That Fill You With Sudden, Inexplicable Curiosity, Not Easily Justified.

Now you have been able to reduce the countless embat-



* * *



tled troops to an array that is, to be sure, very large but still calculable in a finite number; but this relative relief is then undermined by the ambush of the Books Read Long Ago Which It's Now Time To Reread and the Books You've Always Pretended To Have Read And Now It's Time To Sit Down And Really Read Them.

With a zigzag dash you shake them off and leap straight into the citadel of the New Books Whose Author Or Subject Appeals To You. Even inside this stronghold you can make some breaches in the ranks of the defenders, dividing them into New Books By Authors Or On Subjects Not New (for you or in general) and New Books By Authors Or On Subjects Completely Unknown (at least to you), and defining the attraction they have for you on the basis of your desires and needs for the new and the not new (for the new you seek in the not new and for the not new you seek in the new).

All this simply means that, having rapidly glanced over the titles of the volumes displayed in the bookshop, you have turned toward a stack of If on a winter's night a traveler fresh off the press, you have grasped a copy, and you have carried it to the cashier so that your right to own it can be established.

You cast another bewildered look at the books around you (or, rather: it was the books that looked at you, with the bewildered gaze of dogs who, from their cages in the city pound, see a former companion go off on the leash of his master, come to rescue him), and out you went.

You derive a special pleasure from a just-published book, and it isn't only a book you are taking with you but its novelty as well, which could also be merely that of an object fresh from the factory, the youthful bloom of new books, which lasts until the dust jacket begins to yellow, until a veil of smog settles on the top edge, until the binding becomes dog-eared, in the rapid autumn of libraries. No, you hope always to encounter true newness, which,



* * *



having been new once, will continue to be so. Having read the freshly published book, you will take possession of this newness at the first moment, without having to pursue it, to chase it. Will it happen this time? You never can tell. Let's see how it begins.

Perhaps you started leafing through the book already in the shop. Or were you unable to, because it was wrapped in its cocoon of cellophane? Now you are on the bus, standing in the crowd, hanging from a strap by your arm, and you begin undoing the package with your free hand, making movements something like a monkey, a monkey who wants to peel a banana and at the same time cling to the bough. Watch out, you're elbowing your neighbors; apologize, at least.

Or perhaps the bookseller didn't wrap the volume; he gave it to you in a bag. This simplifies matters. You are at the wheel of your car, waiting at a traffic fight, you take the book out of the bag, rip off the transparent wrapping, start reading the first lines. A storm of honking breaks over you; the light is green, you're blocking traffic.

You are at your desk, you have set the book among your business papers as if by chance; at a certain moment you shift a file and you find the book before your eyes, you open it absently, you rest your elbows on the desk, you rest your temples against your hands, curled into fists, you seem to be concentrating on an examination of the papers and instead you are exploring the first pages of the novel. Gradually you settle back in the chair, you raise the book to the level of your nose, you tilt the chair, poised on its rear legs, you pull out a side drawer of the desk to prop your feet on it; the position of the feet during reading is of maximum importance, you stretch your legs out on the top of the desk, on the files to be expedited.

But doesn't this seem to show a lack of respect? Of respect, that is, not for your job (nobody claims to pass judgment on your professional capacities: we assume that



* * *



your duties are a normal element in the system of unproductive activities that occupies such a large part of the national and international economy), but for the book. Worse still if you belong—willingly or unwillingly—to the number of those for whom working means really working, performing, whether deliberately or without premeditation, something necessary or at least not useless for others as well as for oneself; then the book you have brought with you to your place of employment like a kind of amulet or talisman exposes you to intermittent temptations, a few seconds at a time subtracted from the principal object of your attention, whether it is the perforations of electronic cards, the burners of a kitchen stove, the controls of a bulldozer, a patient stretched out on the operating table with his guts exposed.

In other words, it's better for you to restrain your impatience and wait to open the book at home. Now. Yes, you are in your room, calm; you open the book to page one, no, to the last page, first you want to see how long it is. It's not too long, fortunately. Long novels written today are perhaps a contradiction: the dimension of time has been shattered, we cannot love or think except in fragments of time each of which goes off along its own trajectory and immediately disappears. We can rediscover the continuity of time only in the novels of that period when time no longer seemed stopped and did not yet seem to have exploded, a period that lasted no more than a hundred years.

You turn the book over in your hands, you scan the sentences on the back of the jacket, generic phrases that don't say a great deal. So much the better, there is no message that indiscreetly outshouts the message that the book itself must communicate directly, that you must extract from the book, however much or little it may be. Of course, this circling of the book, too, this reading around it before reading inside it, is a part of the pleasure in a



* * *



new book, but like all preliminary pleasures, it has its optimal duration if you want it to serve as a thrust toward the more substantial pleasure of the consummation of the act, namely the reading of the book.

So here you are now, ready to attack the first lines of the first page. You prepare to recognize the unmistakable tone of the author. No. You don't recognize it at all. But now that you think about it, who ever said this author had an unmistakable tone? On the contrary, he is known as an author who changes greatly from one book to the next. And in these very changes you recognize him as himself. Here, however, he seems to have absolutely no connection with all the rest he has written, at least as far as you can recall. Are you disappointed? Let's see. Perhaps at first you feel a bit lost, as when a person appears who, from the name, you identified with a certain face, and you try to make the features you are seeing tally with those you had in mind, and it won't work. But then you go on and you realize that the book is readable nevertheless, independently of what you expected of the author, it's the book in itself that arouses your curiosity; in fact, on sober reflection, you prefer it this way, confronting something and not quite knowing yet what it is.



* * *



If on a winter's night a traveler

The novel begins in a railway station, a locomotive huffs, steam from a piston covers the opening of the chapter, a cloud of smoke hides part of the first paragraph. In the odor of the station there is a passing whiff of station café odor. There is someone looking through the befogged glass, he opens the glass door of the bar, everything is misty, inside, too, as if seen by nearsighted eyes, or eyes irritated by coal dust. The pages of the book are clouded like the windows of an old train, the cloud of smoke rests on the sentences. It is a rainy evening; the man enters the bar; he unbuttons his damp overcoat; a cloud of steam enfolds him; a whistle dies away along tracks that are glistening with rain, as far as the eye can see.

A whistling sound, like a locomotive's, and a cloud of steam rise from the coffee machine that the old counterman puts under pressure, as if he were sending up a signal, or at least so it seems from the series of sentences in the second paragraph, in which the players at the table close the fans of cards against their chests and turn toward the newcomer with a triple twist of their necks,



* * *



shoulders, and chairs, while the customers at the counter raise their little cups and blow on the surface of the coffee, lips and eyes half shut, or suck the head of their mugs of beer, taking exaggerated care not to spill. The cat arches its back, the cashier closes her cash register and it goes pling. All these signs converge to inform us that this is a little provincial station, where anyone is immediately noticed.

Stations are all alike; it doesn't matter if the lights cannot illuminate beyond their blurred halo, all of this is a setting you know by heart, with the odor of train that lingers even after all the trains have left, the special odor of stations after the last train has left. The lights of the station and the sentences you are reading seem to have the job of dissolving more than of indicating the things that surface from a veil of darkness and fog. I have landed in this station tonight for the first time in my life, entering and leaving this bar, moving from the odor of the platform to the odor of wet sawdust in the toilets, all mixed in a single odor which is that of waiting, the odor of telephone booths when all you can do is reclaim your tokens because the number called has shown no signs of life.

I am the man who comes and goes between the bar and the telephone booth. Or, rather: that man is called "I" and you know nothing else about him, just as this station is called only "station" and beyond it there exists nothing except the unanswered signal of a telephone ringing in a dark room of a distant city. I hang up the receiver, I await the rattling flush, down through the metallic throat, I push the glass door again, head toward the cups piled up to dry in a cloud of steam.

The espresso machines in station cafés boast their kinship with the locomotives, the espresso machines of yesterday and today with the locomotives and steam engines of today and yesterday. It's all very well for me to come and go, shift and turn: I am caught in a trap, in that



* * *



nontemporal trap which all stations unfailingly set. A cloud of coal dust still hovers in the air of stations all these years after the lines have been totally electrified, and a novel that talks about trains and stations cannot help conveying this odor of smoke. For a couple of pages now you have been reading on, and this would be the time to tell you clearly whether this station where I have got off is a station of the past or a station of today; instead the sentences continue to move in vagueness, grayness, in a kind of no man's land of experience reduced to the lowest common denominator. Watch out: it is surely a method of involving you gradually, capturing you in the story before you realize it—a trap. Or perhaps the author still has not made up his mind, just as you, reader, for that matter, are not sure what you would most like to read: whether it is the arrival at an old station, which would give you a sense of going back, a renewed concern with lost times and places, or else a flashing of lights and sounds, which would give you the sense of being alive today, in the world where people today believe it is a pleasure to be alive. This bar (or "station buffet," as it is also called) could seem dim and misty only to my eyes, nearsighted or irritated, whereas it could also be steeped in light diffused by tubes the color of lightning and reflected by mirrors in such a way as to fill completely every passage and interstice, and the shadowless space might be overflowing with music exploding at top volume from a vibrant silence-killing machine, and the pinballs and the other electric games simulating horse races and manhunts are all in action, and colored shadows swim in the transparency of a TV and in that of an aquarium of tropical fish enlivened by a vertical stream of air bubbles. And my arm might not hold a briefcase, swollen and a bit worn, but might be pushing a square suitcase of plastic material supplied with little wheels, guided by a chrome stick that can be folded up.



* * *



You, reader, believed that there, on the platform, my gaze was glued to the hands of the round clock of an old station, hands pierced like halberds, in the vain attempt to turn them back, to move backward over the cemetery of spent hours, lying lifeless in their circular pantheon. But who can say that the clock's numbers aren't peeping from rectangular windows, where I see every minute fall on me with a click like the blade of a guillotine? However, the result would not change much: even advancing in a polished, sliding world, my hand contracted on the light rudder of the wheeled suitcase would still express an inner refusal, as if that carefree luggage represented for me an unwelcome and exhausting burden.

Something must have gone wrong for me: some misinformation, a delay, a missed connection; perhaps on arriving I should have found a contact, probably linked with this suitcase that seems to worry me so much, though whether because I am afraid of losing it or because I can't wait to be rid of it is not clear. What seems certain is that it isn't just ordinary baggage, something I can check or pretend to forget in the waiting room. There's no use my looking at my watch; if anyone had come and waited for me he would have gone away again long ago, there's no point in my furiously racking my brain to turn back clocks and calendars in the hope of reaching again the moment before something that should not have happened did happen. If I was to meet someone in this station, someone who perhaps had nothing to do with this station but was simply to get off one train and leave on another train, as I was to have done, and one of the two was to pass something to the other—for example, if I was supposed to give the other this wheeled suitcase which instead has been left on my hands and is scorching them—then the only thing to do is to try to re-establish the lost contact.

I have already crossed the café a couple of times and have looked out of the front door onto the invisible



* * *



square, and each time the wall of darkness has driven back inside this sort of illuminated limbo suspended between the two darknesses, the bundle of tracks and the foggy city. Where would I go out to? The city outside there has no name yet, we don't know if it will remain outside the novel or whether the whole story will be contained within its inky blackness. I know only that this first chapter is taking a while to break free of the station and the bar: it is not wise for me to move away from here where they might still come looking for me, or for me to be seen by other people with this burdensome suitcase. And so I continue to cram tokens into the public telephone, which spits them back at me every time. Many tokens, as if for a long-distance call: God knows where they are now, the people from whom I am to receive instructions or, rather—let's come right out and say it—take orders. It is obvious that I am a subordinate, I do not seem the sort of man who is traveling for personal reasons or who is in business for himself; you would say, on the contrary, that I am doing a job, a pawn in a very complicated game, a little cog in a huge gear, so little that it should not even be seen: in fact, it was established that I would go through here without leaving any traces; and instead, every minute I spend here I am leaving more traces. I leave traces if I do not speak with anyone, since I stick out as a man who won't open his mouth; I leave traces if I speak with someone because every word spoken is a word that remains and can crop up again later, with quotation marks or without. Perhaps this is why the author piles supposition on supposition in long paragraphs without dialogue, a thick, opaque layer of lead where I may pass unnoticed, disappear.

I am not at all the sort of person who attracts attention, I am an anonymous presence against an even more anonymous background. If you, reader, couldn't help picking me out among the people getting off the train and contin-



* * *



ued following me in my to-and-fro-ing between bar and telephone, this is simply because I am called "I" and this is the only thing you know about me, but this alone is reason enough for you to invest a part of yourself in the stranger "I." Just as the author, since he has no intention of telling about himself, decided to call the character "I" as if to conceal him, not having to name him or describe him, because any other name or attribute would define him more than this stark pronoun; still, by the very fact of writing "I" the author feels driven to put into this "I" a bit of himself, of what he feels or imagines he feels. Nothing could be easier for him than to identify himself with me; for the moment my external behavior is that of a traveler who has missed a connection, a situation that is part of everyone's experience. But a situation that takes place at the opening of a novel always refers you to something else that has happened or is about to happen, and it is this something else that makes it risky to identify with me, risky for you the reader and for him the author; and the more gray and ordinary and undistinguished and commonplace the beginning of this novel is, the more you and the author feel a hint of danger looming over that fraction of "I" that you have heedlessly invested in the "I" of a character whose inner history you know nothing about, as you know nothing about the contents of that suitcase he is so anxious to be rid of.

Getting rid of the suitcase was to be the first condition for re-establishing the previous situation: previous to everything that happened afterward. This is what I mean when I say I would like to swim against the stream of time: I would like to erase the consequences of certain events and restore an initial condition. But every moment of my life brings with it an accumulation of new facts, and each of these new facts brings with it its consequences; so the more I seek to return to the zero moment from which I set out, the further I move away from it:



* * *



though all my actions are bent on erasing the consequences of previous actions and though I manage to achieve appreciable results in this erasure, enough to open my heart to hopes of immediate relief, I must, however, bear in mind that my every move to erase previous events provokes a rain of new events, which complicate the situation worse than before and which I will then, in their turn, have to try to erase. Therefore I must calculate carefully every move so as to achieve the maximum of erasure with the minimum of recomplication.

A man whom I do not know was to meet me as soon as I got off the train, if everything hadn't gone wrong. A man with a suitcase on wheels, exactly like mine, empty. The two suitcases would bump into each other as if accidentally in the bustle of travelers on the platform, between one train and another. An event that can happen by chance, but there would have been a password that that man would have said to me, a comment on the headline of the newspaper sticking out of my pocket, on the results of the horse races. "Ah, Zeno of Elea came in first!" And at the same time we would disentangle our suitcases, shifting the metal poles, perhaps also exchanging some remarks about horses, forecasts, odds; and we would then go off toward different trains, each pushing his suitcase in his own direction. No one would have noticed, but I would have been left with the other man's suitcase and he would have taken away mine.

A perfect plan, so perfect that a trivial complication sufficed to spoil it. Now I am here not knowing what to do next, the last traveler waiting in this station where no more trains arrive or leave before tomorrow morning. It is the hour when the little provincial city crawls into its shell again. At the station bar the only people left are locals who all know one another, people who have no connection with the station but come this far through the dark square perhaps because there is no other place open



* * *



in the neighborhood, or perhaps because of the attraction that stations still exercise in provincial cities, that bit of novelty that can be expected from stations, or perhaps only in recollection of the time when a station was the single point of contact with the rest of the world.

It's all very well for me to tell myself there are no provincial cities any more and perhaps there never were any: all places communicate instantly with all other places, a sense of isolation is felt only during the trip between one place and the other, that is, when you are in no place. I, in fact, find myself here without a here or an elsewhere, recognized as an outsider by the nonoutsiders at least as clearly as I recognize the nonoutsiders and envy them. Yes, envy. I am looking from the outside at the life of an ordinary evening in an ordinary little city, and I realize I am cut off from ordinary evenings for God knows how long, and I think of thousands of cities like this, of hundreds of thousands of lighted places where at this hour people allow the evening's darkness to descend and have none of the thoughts in their head that I have in mine; maybe they have other thoughts that aren't at all enviable, but at this moment I would be willing to trade with any one of them. For example, with one of these young men who are making the rounds of local shopkeepers collecting signatures on a petition to City Hall, concerning the tax on neon signs, and who are now reading it to the barman.

The novel here repeats fragments of conversation that seem to have no function beyond that of depicting the daily life of a provincial city. "What about you, Armida? Have you signed yet?" they ask a woman I can see only from behind, a belt hanging from a long overcoat trimmed with fur, the collar turned up, a thread of smoke rising from the fingers gripping the stem of a glass. "Who says I want to put a neon sign over my shop?" she answers. "If the City is planning to save money on street lights, they



* * *



certainly aren't going to light the streets with my money! Anyway, everybody knows where Armida's Leather Goods is. And when I've pulled down the metal blind, the street will just stay dark, and that's that."

"That's a good reason for you to sign," they say to her. They address her familiarly, as tu; they all call one another tu; their speech is half in dialect; these are people used to seeing one another daily year after year; everything they say is the continuation of things already said. They tease one another, even crudely: "Admit it, you like the street dark so nobody can see who comes to your place! Who visits you in the back of the shop after you've locked up?"

These remarks form a murmuring of indistinct voices from which a word or a phrase might emerge, decisive for what comes afterward. To read properly you must take in both the murmuring effect and the effect of the hidden intention, which you (and I, too) are as yet in no position to perceive. In reading, therefore, you must remain both oblivious and highly alert, as I am abstracted but prick up my ears, with my elbow on the counter of the bar and my cheek on my fist. And if now the novel begins to abandon its misty vagueness and give some details about the appearance of the people, the sensation it wants to transmit to you is that of faces seen for the first time but also faces that seem to have been seen thousands of times. We are in a city in whose streets the same people often run into one another; the faces bear a weight of habit which is communicated even to someone like me, who, though I have never been here before, realizes these are habitual faces, whose features the bar mirror has watched thicken or sag, whose expressions evening after evening have become wrinkled or puffy. This woman was perhaps the beauty of the city; even now I feel, seeing her for the first time, she could be called an attractive woman; but if I imagine looking at her with the eyes of the other customers at the



* * *



bar, then a kind of weariness settles on her, perhaps only the shadow of their weariness (or my weariness, or yours). They have known her since she was a girl, they know everything there is to know about her, some of them may have been involved with her, now water under the bridge, over and done with; in other words, there is a veil of other images that settles on her image and blurs it, a weight of memories that keep me from seeing her as a person seen for the first time, other people's memories suspended like the smoke under the lamps.

The great pastime of these customers at the bar seems to be betting: betting on trivial events of daily life. For example, one says, "Let's bet on who comes first to the bar here tonight, Dr. Marne or Chief Gorin." And another says, "And when Dr. Marne does get here, what will he do to avoid meeting his ex-wife? Will he play billiards or fill in the football-pool form?"

In an existence like mine forecasts could not be made: I never know what could happen to me in the next half hour, I can't imagine a life all made up of minimal alternatives, carefully circumscribed, on which bets can be made: either this or that.

"I don't know," I say in a low voice.

"Don't know what?" she asks.

It's a thought I feel I can also say now and not keep for myself as I do with all my thoughts, say it to the woman who is here beside me at the bar, the owner of the leather-goods shop, with whom I have a slight hankering to strike up a conversation. "Is that how it is, here in your town?"

"No, it's not true," she answers me, and I knew this was how she would answer me. She insists that nothing can be foreseen, here or anywhere else: of course, every evening at this hour Dr. Marne closes his office and Chief Gorin comes off duty at the police station; and they always drop by here, first one or first the other; but what does that signify?



* * *



"In any case, nobody seems to doubt the fact that the doctor will try to avoid the former Madame Marne," I say to her.

"I am the former Madame Marne," she answers. "Don't listen to them."

Your attention, as reader, is now completely concentrated on the woman, already for several pages you have been circling around her, I have—no, the author has— been circling around the feminine presence, for several pages you have been expecting this female shadow to take shape the way female shadows take shape on the written page, and it is your expectation, reader, that drives the author toward her; and I, too, though I have other things to think about, there I let myself go, I speak to her, I strike up a conversation that I should break off as quickly as I can, in order to go away, disappear. You surely would want to know more about what she's like, but instead only a few elements surface on the written page, her face remains hidden by the smoke and her hair, you would need to understand beyond the bitter twist of her mouth what there is that isn't bitter and twisted.

"What stories do they tell?" I ask. "I don't know a thing. I know that you have a shop, without a neon sign. But I don't even know where it is."

She explains to me. It is a leather-goods shop, selling suitcases and travel articles. It isn't in the station square but on a side street, near the grade crossing of the freight station.

"But why are you interested?"

"I wish I had arrived here earlier. I would walk along the dark street, I would see your shop all lighted up, I would go inside, I would say to you: If you like, I'll help you pull down the shutter."

She tells me she has already pulled down the shutter, but she has to go back to the shop to take inventory, and she will be staying there till late.



* * *



The men in the bar are exchanging wisecracks and slaps on the back. One bet has already been decided: the doctor is coming into the place.

"The chief's late tonight. I wonder why."

The doctor comes in and waves a general greeting; his gaze does not stop on his wife, but he has certainly noticed that a man is talking with her. He goes on to the end of the room, turning his back on the bar; he thrusts a coin into the pinball machine. Now I, who should have remained unnoticed, have been scrutinized, photographed by eyes that I cannot deceive myself I have eluded, eyes that forget nothing and no one connected with the object of jealousy and pain. Those slightly heavy, slightly watery eyes are enough to make me realize that the drama between the two has not yet ended: he continues coming to this café every evening to see her, to open the old wound again, perhaps also to know who is walking her home this evening; and she comes to this café every evening perhaps deliberately to make him suffer, or perhaps hoping that the habit of suffering will become for him a habit like any other, that it will take on the flavor of the nothingness that has coated her mouth and her life for years.

"The thing I'd like most in the world," I say to her, since at this point I might as well go on talking with her, "is to make clocks run backward."

The woman gives some ordinary answer, such as, "You only have to move the hands." "No, with thought, by concentrating until I force time to move back," I say; or, rather, it isn't clear whether I really say it or would like to say it or whether the author interprets in this way the half sentence I am muttering. "When I got here my first thought was: Maybe I achieved such an effort with my thoughts that time has made a complete revolution; here I am at the station from which I left on my first journey, it has remained as it was then, without any change. All the lives that I could have led begin here; there is the girl



* * *



who could have been my girl and wasn't, with the same eyes, the same hair...."

She looks around, as if making fun of me; I point my chin at her; she raises the corners of her mouth as if to smile, then stops: because she has changed her mind, or because this is the only way she smiles. "I don't know if that's a compliment, but I'll take it as one. And then what?"

'Then I am here, I am the I of the present, with this suitcase."

This is the first time I mention the suitcase, even though I never stop thinking about it.

And she says, "This is the evening of square suitcases on wheels."

I remain calm, impassive. I ask, "What do you mean?"

"I sold one today, a suitcase like that."

"Who bought it?"

"A stranger. Like you. He was on his way to the station, he was leaving. With an empty suitcase, just bought. Exactly like yours."

"What's odd about that? Don't you sell suitcases?"

"I have a lot of this model in stock at the shop, but nobody here buys them. People don't like them, or they're no use. Or people don't know them. But they must be convenient."

"Not for me. For example, just when I'm thinking that this evening could be a beautiful evening for me, I remember I have to drag this suitcase after me, and I can't think about anything else."

"Then why don't you leave it somewhere?"

"Like a suitcase shop," I say.

"Why not? Another suitcase, more or less."

She stands up from the stool, adjusts the collar of her overcoat in the mirror, the belt.

"If I come by later on and rap on the shutter, will you hear me?"



* * *



'Try."

She doesn't say good-bye to anyone. She is already outside in the square.

Dr. Marne leaves the pinball machine and approaches the bar. He wants to look me in the face, perhaps overhear some remarks from the others, or only a snicker. But they are talking of bets, the bets on him, not caring if he listens. There is a stirring of gaiety and intimacy, of slaps on the back, which surrounds Dr. Marne, a business of old jokes and teasing; but at the center of this merriment there is a zone of respect that is never breached, not only because Marne is a physician, public health officer or something of the sort, but also because he is a friend, or perhaps because he's a poor bastard who bears his misfortunes while remaining a friend.

"Chief Gorin is arriving later than all the predictions tonight," someone says, because at that moment the chief enters the bar.

He enters. "Good evening, one and all!" He comes over to me, lowers his eyes to the suitcase, the newspaper, mutters through clenched teeth, "Zeno of Elea," then goes to the cigarette machine.

Have they thrown me to the police? Is he a policeman who is working for our organization? I go over to the machine as if I were also buying cigarettes.

He says, "They've killed Jan. Clear out."

"The suitcase?" I ask.

"Take it away again. We want nothing to do with it now. Catch the eleven o'clock express."

"But it doesn't stop here...."

"It will. Go to track six. Opposite the freight station. You have three minutes."

"But..."

"Move, or I'll have to arrest you."

The organization is powerful. It can command the police, the railroad. I trail my suitcase along the passages



* * *



between the tracks until I reach track six. I walk along the platform. The freight section is at the end, with the grade crossing that opens into the fog and the darkness. The chief is at the door of the station bar, keeping an eye on me. The express arrives at top speed. It slows down, stops, erases me from the chief's sight, pulls out again.



* * *



[2]

You have now read about thirty pages and you're becoming caught up in the story. At a certain point you remark: "This sentence sounds somehow familiar. In fact, this whole passage reads like something I've read before." Of course: there are themes that recur, the text is interwoven with these reprises, which serve to express the fluctuation of time. You are the sort of reader who is sensitive to such refinements; you are quick to catch the author's intentions and nothing escapes you. But, at the same time, you also feel a certain dismay; just when you were beginning to grow truly interested, at this very point the author feels called upon to display one of those virtuoso tricks so customary in modern writing, repeating a paragraph word for word. Did you say paragraph? Why, it's a whole page; you make the comparison, he hasn't changed even a comma. And as you continue, what develops? Nothing: the narration is repeated, identical to the pages you have read!

Wait a minute! Look at the page number. Damn! From page 32 you've gone back to page 17! What you thought was a stylistic subtlety on the author's part is simply a printers' mistake: they have inserted the same pages twice. The mistake occurred as they were binding the volume: a book is made up of sixteen-page signatures; each signature is a large sheet on which sixteen pages are printed, and which is then folded over eight times; when all the signatures are bound together, it can happen that two identical signatures end up in the same copy; it's the sort of accident that occurs every now and then. You leaf anxiously through the next pages to find page 33, assuming it exists; a repeated signature would be a minor inconvenience, the irreparable damage comes when the proper



* * *



signature has vanished, landing in another copy where perhaps that one will be doubled and this one will be missing. In any event, you want to pick up the thread of your reading, nothing else matters to you, you had reached a point where you can't skip even one page.

Here is page 31 again, page 32... and then what comes next? Page 17 all over again, a third time! What kind of book did they sell you, anyway? They bound together all these copies of the same signature, not another page in the whole book is any good.

You fling the book on the floor, you would hurl it out of the window, even out of the closed window, through the slats of the Venetian blinds; let them shred its incongruous quires, let sentences, words, morphemes, phonemes gush forth, beyond recomposition into discourse; through the panes, and if they are of unbreakable glass so much the better, hurl the book and reduce it to photons, undulatory vibrations, polarized spectra; through the wall, let the book crumble into molecules and atoms passing between atom and atom of the reinforced concrete, breaking up into electrons, neutrons, neutrinos, elementary particles more and more minute; through the telephone wires, let it be reduced to electronic impulses, into flow of information, shaken by redundancies and noises, and let it be degraded into a swirling entropy. You would like to throw it out of the house, out of the block, beyond the neighborhood, beyond the city limits, beyond the state confines, beyond the regional administration, beyond the national community, beyond the Common Market, beyond Western culture, beyond the continental shelf, beyond the atmosphere, the biosphere, the stratosphere, the field of gravity, the solar system, the galaxy, the cumulus of galaxies, to succeed in hurling it beyond the point the galaxies have reached in their expansion, where space-time has not yet arrived, where it would be received by nonbeing, or, rather, the not-being which has never been



* * *



and will never be, to be lost in the most absolutely guaranteed undeniable negativity. Merely what it deserves, neither more nor less.

But no. Instead you pick it up, you dust it off; you have to take it back to the bookseller so he will exchange it for you. You know you are somewhat impulsive, but you have learned to control yourself. The thing that most exasperates you is to find yourself at the mercy of the fortuitous, the aleatory, the random, in things and in human actions—carelessness, approximation, imprecision, whether your own or others'. In such instances your dominant passion is the impatience to erase the disturbing effects of that arbitrariness or distraction, to re-establish the normal course of events. You can't wait to get your hands on a nondefective copy of the book you've begun. You would rush to the bookshop at once if shops were not closed at this hour. You have to wait until tomorrow.

You spend a restless night, your sleep is an intermittent, jammed flow, like the reading of the novel, with dreams that seem to you the repetition of one dream always the same. You fight with the dreams as with formless and meaningless life, seeking a pattern, a route that must surely be there, as when you begin to read a book and you don't yet know in which direction it will carry you. What you would like is the opening of an abstract and absolute space and time in which you could move, following an exact, taut trajectory; but when you seem to be succeeding, you realize you are motionless, blocked, forced to repeat everything from the beginning.

The next day, as soon as you have a free moment, you run to the bookshop, you enter, holding the book already opened, pointing your finger at a page, as if that alone were enough to make clear the general disarray. "You know what you sold me? . .. Look here.. .. Just when it was getting interesting..."

The bookseller maintains his composure. "Ah, you, too?



* * *



I've had several complaints already. And only this morning I received a form letter from the publisher. You see? 'In the distribution of the latest works on our list a part of the edition of the volume If on a winter's night a traveler by Italo Calvino has proved defective and must be withdrawn from circulation. Through an error of the bindery, the printed signatures of that book became mixed with those of another new publication, the Polish novel Outside the town of Malbork by Tazio Bazakbal. With profound apologies for the unfortunate incident, the publisher will replace the spoiled copies at the earliest possible moment, et cetera.' Now I ask you, must a poor bookseller take the blame for the negligence of others? We've been going crazy all day. We've checked the Calvinos copy by copy. There are a number of sound volumes, happily, and we can immediately replace your defective Traveler with a brand-new one in mint condition."

Hold on a minute. Concentrate. Take all the information that has poured down on you at once and put it in order. A Polish novel. Then the book you began reading with such involvement wasn't the book you thought but was a Polish novel instead. That is the book you are now so anxious to procure. Don't let them fool you. Explain clearly the situation. "No, actually I don't really give a damn about that Calvino any more. I started the Polish one and it's the Polish one I want to go on with. Do you have this Bazakbal book?"

"If that's what you prefer. Just a moment ago, another customer, a young lady, came in with the same problem, and she also wanted to exchange her book for the Polish. There, you see that pile of Bazakbal on the counter, right under your nose? Help yourself."

"But will this copy be defective?"

"Listen. At this point I'm not swearing to anything. If the most respected publishing firms make such a muddle, you can't trust anything any more. I'll tell you exactly



* * *



what I told the young lady. If there is any further cause for complaint, you will be reimbursed. I can't do more than that."

The young lady. He has pointed out a young lady to you. She is there between two rows of bookshelves in the shop, looking among the Penguin Modern Classics, running a lovely and determined finger over the pale aubergine-colored spines. Huge, swift eyes, complexion of good tone and good pigment, a richly waved haze of hair.

And so the Other Reader makes her happy entrance into your field of vision, Reader, or, rather, into the field of your attention; or, rather, you have entered a magnetic field from whose attraction you cannot escape. Don't waste time, then, you have a good excuse to strike up a conversation, a common ground, just think a moment, you can show off your vast and various reading, go ahead, what are you waiting for?

"Then you, too, ha ha, the Pole," you say, all in one breath. "But that book that begins and then gets stuck there, what a fraud, because it happened to you, too, I'm told; and the same with me, you know? Having given it a try, I'm dropping this one and taking this other, but what a coincidence, the two of us."

Hmm, perhaps you could have coordinated it a bit better, but you have at least expressed the main ideas. Now it's her turn.

She smiles. She has dimples. She is even more attractive to you.

She says: "Ah, indeed, I was so anxious to read a good book. Right at the beginning, this one, no, but then it began to appeal to me.... Such a rage when I saw it broke off. And it wasn't that author. It did seem right away a bit different from his other books. And it was really Bazakbal. He's good, though, this Bazakbal. I've never read anything of his."

"Me either," you can say, reassured, reassuring.



* * *



"A bit too unfocused, his way of telling a story, too much so for me. I rather enjoy that sense of bewilderment a novel gives you when you start reading it, but if the first effect is fog, I'm afraid the moment the fog lifts my pleasure in reading will be lost, too."

You shake your head pensively. "In fact, there is that risk."

"I prefer novels," she adds, "that bring me immediately into a world where everything is precise, concrete, specific. I feel a special satisfaction in knowing that things are made in that certain fashion and not otherwise, even the most commonplace things that in real life seem indifferent to me."

Do you agree? Then say so. "Ah, yes, that sort of book is really worthwhile."

And she continues: "Anyway, this is also an interesting novel, I can't deny that."

Go on, don't let the conversation die. Say something; just keep talking. "Do you read many novels? You do? So do I, or some at least, though nonfiction is more in my line...." Is that all you can think of? Now what? Are you stopping? Good night! Aren't you capable of asking her: Have you read this one? And this? Which of the two do you like better? There, now you have something to talk about for half an hour.

The trouble is that she's read many more novels than you have, especially foreign ones, and she has an orderly memory, she refers to specific episodes; she asks you, "And do you remember what Henry's aunt says when..." and you, who unearthed that title because you know the title and nothing more, and you liked letting her believe you had read it, now have to extricate yourself with generic comments, like "It moves a bit slowly for me," or else "I like it because it's ironic," and she answers, "Really? You find it ironic? I wouldn't have said..." and you are upset. You launch into an opinion on a famous author,



* * *



because you have read one of his books, two at most, and without hesitation she attacks frontally the opera omnia, which she seems to know perfectly, and if she does have some doubts, that's worse still, because she asks you, "And the famous episode of the cut photograph: is it in that book or the other one? I always get them mixed up...." You make a guess, since she gets mixed up. And she says, "Why, what are you talking about? That can't be right..." Well, let's say you both get mixed up.

Better to fall back on your reading of yesterday evening, on the volume you are both now clutching in your hands, which should repay you for your recent disappointment. "Let's hope," you say, "that we've got a perfect copy this time, properly bound, so we won't be interrupted right at the climax, as happens..." (As happens when, how? What do you mean? ) "I mean, let's hope we get to the end satisfactorily."

"Oh, yes," she answers. Did you hear that? She said, "Oh, yes." It's your turn now, it's up to you to make a move.

"Then I hope I'll meet you again, since you're also a customer here; that way we could exchange our impressions after reading the book." And she answers, "With pleasure."

You know where you want to arrive, it is a fine net you are spreading out. "The funniest thing would be if, just as we had thought we were reading Italo Calvino and it turned out to be Bazakbal, now that we hope to read Bazakbal we open the book and find Italo Calvino."

"Oh, no! If that happens, we'll sue the publisher!"

"Listen, why don't we exchange telephone numbers?" (This is what you were aiming at, O Reader, moving around her like a rattlesnake!) "That way, if one of us finds something wrong with his copy, he can ask the other for help.... If there are two of us, we have a better chance of putting together a complete copy."



* * *



There, you have said it. What is more natural than that a solidarity, a complicity, a bond should be established between Reader and Reader, thanks to the book?

You can leave the bookshop content, you, a man who thought that the period when you could still expect something from life had ended. You are bearing with you two different expectations, and both promise days of pleasant hopes; the expectation contained in the book—of a reading experience you are impatient to resume—and the expectation contained in that telephone number—of hearing again the vibrations, at times treble and at times smoldering, of that voice, when it will answer your first phone call in a short while, in fact tomorrow, with the fragile pretext of the book, to ask her if she likes it or not, to tell her how many pages you have read or not read, to suggest to her that you meet again ...

Who you are, Reader, your age, your status, profession, income: that would be indiscreet to ask. It's your business, you're on your own. What counts is the state of your spirit now, in the privacy of your home, as you try to re-establish perfect calm in order to sink again into the book; you stretch out your legs, you draw them back, you stretch them again. But something has changed since yesterday. Your reading is no longer solitary: you think of the Other Reader, who, at this same moment, is also opening the book; and there, the novel to be read is superimposed by a possible novel to be lived, the continuation of your story with her, or better still, the beginning of a possible story. This is how you have changed since yesterday, you who insisted you preferred a book, something solid, which lies before you, easily defined, enjoyed without risks, to a real-life experience, always elusive, discontinuous, debated. Does this mean that the book has become an instrument, a channel of communication, a rendezvous? This does not mean its reading will grip you less: on the contrary, something has been added to its powers.



* * *



This volume's pages are uncut: a first obstacle opposing your impatience. Armed with a good paper knife, you prepare to penetrate its secrets. With a determined slash you cut your way between the tide page and the beginning of the first chapter. And then ...

Then from the very first page you realize that the novel you are holding has nothing to do with the one you were reading yesterday.



* * *



Outside the town of Malbork

An odor of frying wafts at the opening of the page, of onion in fact, onion being fried, a bit scorched, because in the onion there are veins that turn violet and then brown, and especially the edge, the margin, of each little sliver of onion becomes black before golden, it is the juice of the onion that is carbonized, passing through a series of olfactory and chromatic nuances, all enveloped in the smell of simmering oil. Rape oil, the text specifies; everything here is very precise, things with their nomenclature and the sensations that things transmit, all the victuals on the fire at the same time on the kitchen stove, each in its vessel exactly denominated, the pans, the pots, the kettles, and similarly the operations that each preparation involves, dusting with flour, beating the egg, slicing the cucumbers in fine rounds, larding the hen to be roasted. Here everything is very concrete, substantial, depicted with sure expertise; or at least the impression given to you, Reader, is one of expertise, though there are some foods you don't know, mentioned by name, which the translator has decided to leave in the original; for example, schoëblintsjia.



* * *



But on reading schoëblintsjia you are ready to swear to the existence of schoëblintsjia, you can taste its flavor distinctly even though the text doesn't say what that flavor is, an acidulous flavor, partly because the word, with its sound or only with its visual impression, suggests an acidulous flavor to you, and partly because in the symphony of flavors and words you feel the necessity of an acidulous note.

As Brigd kneads the ground meat into the flour moistened with egg, her firm red arms dotted with golden freckles become covered with particles of white dust with bits of raw meat stuck to them. Every time Brigd's torso moves back and forth at the marble table, her skirts rise an inch or two behind and show the hollow between her calf and femoral biceps, where the skin is whiter, crossed by a fine, pale-blue vein. The characters take on form gradually in the accumulation of minute details and precise movements, but also of remarks, shreds of conversation, as when old Hunder says, "This year's doesn't make you jump the way last year's did," and after a few lines you understand he means the red pepper; and "You're the one who jumps less with every passing year!" Aunt Ugurd says, tasting something with a wooden spoon and adding a pinch of cinnamon to the pot.

Every moment you discover there is a new character, you don't know how many people there are in this immense kitchen of ours, it's no use counting, there were always many of us, at Kudgiwa, always coming and going: the sum never works out properly because different names can belong to the same character, indicated according to the circumstances by baptismal name, nickname, surname or patronymic, and even by appellations such as "Jan's widow," or "the apprentice from the corn shop." But what counts are the physical details that the novel underlines—Bronko's gnawed nails, the down on Brigd's cheeks—and also the gestures, the utensils that



* * *



this person or that is handling—the meat pounder, the colander for the cress, the butter curler—so that each character already receives a first definition through this action or attribute; but then we wish to learn even more, as if the butter curler already determined the character and the fate of the person who is presented in the first chapter handling a butter curler, and as if you, Reader, were already prepared, each time that character is introduced again in the course of the novel, to cry, "Ah, that's the butter-curler one!" thus obligating the author to attribute to him acts and events in keeping with that initial butter curler.

Our kitchen at Kudgiwa seemed to be made deliberately so that at any hour many persons would be found in it, each intent on cooking himself something, one hulling chick peas, another putting the tench in marinade, everybody seasoning or cooking or eating something, and when they went away, others came, from dawn till late at night, and that morning I had come down at this early hour and already the kitchen was in full operation because it was a different day from the others: Mr. Kauderer had arrived the night before with his son, and he would be going away this morning, taking me in the son's place. I was leaving home for the first time: I was to spend the whole season on Mr. Kauderer's estate, in the province of Pëtkwo, until the rye harvest, to learn the working of the new drying machines imported from Belgium; during this period Ponko, youngest of the Kauderers, would stay with us and acquire the techniques of grafting rowans.

The usual smells and noises of the house crowded around me that morning as if in farewell: I was about to lose everything I had known till then, and for such a long period—so it seemed to me—that when I came back nothing would be as it had been before, nor would I be the same I. And hence this farewell of mine was as if forever: to the kitchen, the house, to Aunt Ugurd's knodel; so this



* * *



sense of concreteness that you perceived from the very first lines bears in it also the sense of loss, the vertigo of dissolution, and you realize that you perceived this, too, alert Reader that you are, from the first page, when, though pleased with the precision of this writing, you sensed that, to tell the truth, everything was slipping through your fingers; perhaps it was also the fault of the translation, you told yourself, which may very well be faithful but certainly doesn't render the solid substance those terms must have in the original language, whatever it may be. Each sentence, in short, wants to convey to you both the solidity of my relationship with the Kudgiwa house and my regret at losing it, and further—perhaps you didn't realize it, but if you think back you'll see this is exactly the case—the drive to break away from it, to run toward the unknown, to turn the page, far from the acidulous odor of the schoëblintsjia, to begin a new chapter with new encounters in the endless sunsets beyond the Aagd, on the Pëtkwo Sundays, at the festivities in the Cider Palace.

The portrait of a girl with short-cropped black hair and a long face had emerged for a moment from Ponko's little trunk; then he immediately hid it under an oilskin jacket. In the bedroom beneath the dovecote, which had till now been mine and from today on would be Ponko's, he was unpacking his things and arranging them in the drawers I had just emptied. I watched him in silence, sitting on my already closed little trunk, mechanically hammering at a stud that stuck out, a bit crooked; we had said nothing to each other after a grunted hello; I followed him in all his movements, trying to be thoroughly aware of what was going on: an outsider was taking my place, was becoming me, my cage with the starlings would become his, the stereoscope, the real Uhlan helmet hanging from a nail, all my things that I couldn't take with me remained to him; or, rather, it was my relationship with things, places,



* * *



people, that was becoming his, just as I was about to become him, to take his place among the things and people of his life.

That girl... "Who is that girl?" I asked, and with an ill-advised movement I reached out to uncover and grasp the photograph in its carved wooden frame. This girl was different from the girls in these parts who all have round faces and braids the color of bran. It was not until this moment that I thought of Brigd; in a flash I saw Ponko and Brigd, who would dance together on the Feast of Saint Thaddeus, Brigd who would mend Ponko's woolen gloves, Ponko who would give Brigd a marten captured with my trap. "Let go of that picture!" Ponko yelled and grabbed both my arms with iron fingers. "Let go! This minute !"

"To remind you of Zwida Ozkart," I managed to read on the picture. "Who is Zwida Ozkart?" I asked, and already a fist had struck me full in the face, and already with fists clenched I had flung myself on Ponko and we were rolling on the floor trying to twist each other's arms, knee each other, break ribs.

Ponko's body had heavy bones, his arms and legs hit sharply, the hair I tried to grab in order to throw him backward was a brush as stiff as a dog's coat. While we were clutching each other I had the sensation that in this struggle the transformation was taking place, and when he rose he would be me and I him, but perhaps I am thinking this only now, or it is only you, Reader, who are thinking it, not I; indeed, in that moment wrestling with him meant holding tight to myself, to my past, so that it wouldn't fall into his hands, even at the cost of destroying it, it was Brigd I wanted to destroy so she wouldn't fall into Ponko's hands, Brigd, with whom I had never thought I was in love, and I didn't think I was even now, but once, only once, I had rolled with her, one on top of the other almost like now with Ponko, and she and I were



* * *



biting each other on the pile of peat behind the stove, and now I felt that I had already been fighting for her against a Ponko still in the future, that I was already fighting him for both Brigd and Zwida. I had been seeking to tear something from my past so as not to leave it to my rival, to the new me with dog's hair, or perhaps already I had been trying to wring from the past of that unknown me a secret to add to my past or to my future.

The page you're reading should convey this violent contact of dull and painful blows, of fierce and lacerating responses; this bodiliness of using one's own body against another body, melding the weight of one's own efforts and the precision of one's own receptivity and adapting them to the mirror image of them that the adversary reflects. But if the sensations reading evokes remain scant compared to any sensation really experienced, it is also because what I am feeling as I crush Ponko's chest beneath my chest or as I block the twisting of an arm behind my back is not the sensation I would need to declare what I would like to declare, namely the amorous possession of Brigd, of the firm fullness of that girl's flesh, so different from the bony solidity of Ponko, and also the amorous possession of Zwida, of the melting softness I imagine in Zwida, the possession of a Brigd I feel already lost and of a Zwida who has only the bodiless substance of a photograph under glass. In the tangle of male limbs opposing and identical, I try in vain to clasp those female ghosts that vanish in their unattainable difference; and I try at the same time to strike myself, perhaps the other self that is about to take my place in the house or else the self most mine that I want to snatch away from that other, but which I feel pressing against me and which is only the alienness of the other, as if that other had already taken my place and any other place, and I were erased from the world.

The world seemed alien to me when in the end I broke



* * *



away from my adversary with a furious push and stood up, planting my feet on the floor. Alien was my room, the small trunk that was my luggage, the view from the little window. I feared I could no longer establish a relationship with anyone or anything. I wanted to go find Brigd, but without knowing what I wanted to say to her or do to her, what I wanted to have her say to me or do to me. I headed toward Brigd thinking of Zwida: what I sought was a two-headed figure, a Brigd-Zwida, just as I was double-faced moving away from Ponko, trying in vain with my saliva to remove a spot of blood from my corduroy suit—my blood or his, from my teeth or from Ponko's nose.

And double-faced as I was, I heard and saw, beyond the door of the big room, Mr. Kauderer standing, making a broad horizontal gesture to measure the space before him and saying, "And so I found them before me, Kauni and Pittò, twenty-two and twenty-four years old, with their chests torn open by wolf bullets."

"When did it happen?" my grandfather asked. "We knew nothing about it."

"Before leaving we attended the octave service."

"We thought things had long been settled between your family and the Ozkarts. That after all these years you had buried the hatchet, that the whole horrible business between you was over."

Mr. Kauderer's eyes, which had no lashes, kept staring into the void; nothing moved in his gutta-percha-yellow face. "Between Ozkarts and Kauderers peace lasts only from one funeral to the next, and the hatchet is not buried, but our dead are buried and we write on their graves: This was the Ozkarts' doing."

"And what about your bunch, then?" Bronko asked, a man who called a spade a spade.

"The Ozkarts also write on their graves: This was the Kauderers' doing." Then, rubbing one finger over his mustache, he said, "Here Ponko will be safe, at last."



* * *



It was at this point that my mother clasped her hands and said, "Holy Virgin, will our Gritzvi be in danger? They won't take it out on him?"

Mr. Kauderer shook his head but didn't look her in the face. "He isn't a Kauderer! We're the ones who are in danger, always!"

The door opened. From the hot urine of the horses in the yard a cloud of steam rose in the icy, glassy air. The stableboy stuck his flushed face inside and announced, "The buggy is ready!"

"Gritzvi! Where are you? Hurry up!" Grandfather shouted.

I took a step forward, toward Mr. Kauderer, who was buttoning up his felt greatcoat.



* * *



[3]

The pleasures derived from the use of a paper knife are tactile, auditory, visual, and especially mental. Progress in reading is preceded by an act that traverses the material solidity of the book to allow you access to its incorporeal substance. Penetrating among the pages from below, the blade vehemently moves upward, opening a vertical cut in a flowing succession of slashes that one by one strike the fibers and mow them down—with a friendly and cheery crackling the good paper receives that first visitor, who announces countless turns of the pages stirred by the wind or by a gaze—then the horizonal fold, especially if it is double, opposes greater resistance, because it requires an awkward backhand motion—there the sound is one of muffled laceration, with deeper notes. The margin of the pages is jagged, revealing its fibrous texture; a fine shaving—also known as "curl"—is detached from it, as pretty to see as a wave's foam on the beach. Opening a path for yourself, with a sword's blade, in the barrier of pages becomes linked with the thought of how much the word contains and conceals: you cut your way through your reading as if through a dense forest.

The novel you are reading wants to present to you a corporeal world, thick, detailed. Immersed in your reading, you move the paper knife mechanically in the depth of the volume: your reading has not yet reached the end of the first chapter, but your cutting has already gone far ahead. And there, at the moment when your attention is gripped by the suspense, in the middle of a decisive sentence, you turn the page and find yourself facing two blank sheets.

You are dazed, contemplating that whiteness cruel as a wound, almost hoping it is your dazzled eyesight casting a blinding glare on the book, from which, gradually, the



* * *



zebra rectangle of inked letters will return to the surface. No, an intact blank really reigns on the two sides that confront each other. You turn another page and find the next two are printed properly. Blank, printed; blank, printed; and so on until the end. The large sheets were printed only on one side, then folded and bound as if they were complete.

And so you see this novel so tightly interwoven with sensations suddenly riven by bottomless chasms, as if the claim to portray vital fullness revealed the void beneath. You try jumping over the gap, picking up the story by grasping the edge of the prose that comes afterward, jagged like the margin of the pages separated by the paper knife. You can't get your bearings: the characters have changed, the settings, you don't understand what it's about, you find names of people and don't know who they are—Hela, Casimir. You begin to suspect that this is a different book, perhaps the real Polish novel Outside the town of Malbork, whereas the beginning you have read could belong to yet another book, God only knows which.

It had already occurred to you that the names didn't sound particularly Polish: Brigd, Gritzvi. You have a good atlas, very detailed; you turn to the index of places: Pëtkwo, which should be a fairly important town, and the Aagd, which could be a river or a lake. You track them down in a remote plain of the north that wars and peace treaties have successively awarded to different countries. Perhaps also to Poland? You consult an encyclopedia, a historical atlas; no, Poland has nothing to do with it; this area, in the period between the two wars, was an independent state: Cimmeria; capital Orkko; national language Cimmerian, belonging to the Bothno-Ugaric family. The "Cimmeria" article in the encyclopedia concludes with not very reassuring sentences: "In successive territorial divisions between her powerful neighbors the young nation was soon erased from the map; the autochthonous



* * *



population was dispersed; Cimmerian language and culture had no development."

You are impatient to get in touch with the Other Reader, to ask her if her copy is like yours, and to tell her your conjectures, the information you have gathered.... You look in your pocket diary for the number you wrote next to her name when you and she introduced yourselves.

"Hello, Ludmilla? Have you seen? It's a different novel, but this one, too, or at least my copy..."

The voice at the other end of the wire is hard, a bit ironic. "Look, I'm not Ludmilla. I'm her sister, Lotaria." That's right, she did tell you: "If I don't answer, my sister will be there." "Ludmilla is out. What is it? What did you want?"

"I just wanted to tell her about a book.... It's not important, I'll call back...."

"A novel? Ludmilla always has her nose buried in a novel. Who's the author?"

"Well, it's a kind of a Polish novel that she's also reading. I thought we might exchange some impressions. Bazakbal's novel."

"Polish? What sort?"

"Um, it doesn't seem half bad to me."

No, you misunderstood. Lotaria wants to know the author's position with regard to Trends of Contemporary Thought and Problems That Demand a Solution. To make your task easier she furnishes you with a list of names of Great Masters among whom you should situate him.

Again you feel the sensation you felt when the paper knife revealed the facing white pages. "I couldn't say, exactly. You see, I'm not actually sure even of the title or the author's name. Ludmilla will tell you about it: it's a rather complicated story."

"Ludmilla reads one novel after another, but she never clarifies the problems. It seems a big waste of time to me. Don't you have this impression?"



* * *



If you start arguing, she'll never let you go. Now she is inviting you to a seminar at the university, where books are analyzed according to all Codes, Conscious and Unconscious, and in which all Taboos are eliminated, the ones imposed by the dominant Sex, Class, and Culture.

"Will Ludmilla be going, too?"

No, it seems Ludmilla takes no part in her sister's activities. But on the other hand, Lotaria is counting on your participation.

You prefer not to commit yourself. "I'll see, I'll try to drop by. I can't promise. Meanwhile, would you please tell your sister I called?... But anyway, it doesn't matter, I'll call back. Thanks a lot." That's enough, go ahead and hang up.

But Lotaria detains you. "Look, there's no point in your calling here again, this isn't Ludmilla's place, it's mine. Ludmilla always gives my number to people she doesn't know, she says I keep them at a distance..."

You are hurt. Another cruel shock: the book that seemed so promising broke off; the telephone number that you also believed the beginning of something proves to be a dead end, with this Lotaria who insists on questioning you....

"Ah, I see. Sorry."

"Hello? Ah, you're the gentleman I met in the bookshop?" A different voice, hers, has taken over the telephone. 'Yes, this is Ludmilla. You have blank pages, too? We might have expected as much. Another trap. Just when I was getting involved in it, when I wanted to read more about Ponko, and Gritzvi..."

You are so happy you can't utter a word. You say: "Zwida..."

"What?"

"Yes, Zwida Ozkart! I would like to know what goes on between Gritzvi and Zwida Ozkart.... Is this novel really the kind you like?"

A pause. Then Ludmilla's voice resumes slowly, as if



* * *



she were trying to express something not easily defined. 'Yes, it is. I like it very much.... Still, I wish the things I read weren't all present, so solid you can touch them; I would like to feel a presence around them, something else, you don't quite know what, the sign of some unknown thing...."

"Yes, in that respect, I, too..."

"Even though, I don't mean to say.... here, too, the element of mystery isn't lacking...."

You say: "Well, look, the mystery, in my opinion, is this. It's a Cimmerian novel, yes, Cim-mer-ian, not Polish, and the title and the author aren't the ones they say. You didn't realize? Let me tell you. Cimmeria, two hundred and forty thousand inhabitants, capital Orkko, principal resources peat and by-products, bituminous compounds. No, this isn't in the novel...."

A silence, on your part and hers. Perhaps Ludmilla has covered the receiver with her hand and is conferring with her sister. She probably has ideas of her own on Cimmeria, that one. God knows what she'll come out with. Be careful.

"Hello, Ludmilla."

"Hello."

Your voice turns warm, winning, insistent. "Listen, Ludmilla, I must see you, we have to talk about this thing, these circumstances, coincidences, discrepancies. I'd like to see you right away. Where are you? Where would you prefer us to meet? I'll be there in a minute."

And she says, calm as ever: "I know a professor who teaches Cimmerian literature at the university. We could consult him. Let me telephone him and ask when he can see us."

Here you are at the university. Ludmilla has announced your visit with her to Professor Uzzi-Tuzii, at his department. Over the telephone the professor seemed delighted



* * *



to put himself at the disposal of anyone taking an interest in Cimmerian authors.

You would have preferred to see Ludmilla alone somewhere, or perhaps to pick her up at home and accompany her to the university. You suggested this to her, over the telephone, but she said no, no need for you to go out of your way, at that hour she would already be in the neighborhood on other business. You insisted; you don't know your way around, you're afraid of getting lost in the labyrinth of the university: wouldn't it be better to meet in a café a quarter of an hour before? This didn't suit her, either; you would meet directly there, "at Bothno-Ugaric Languages," everybody knows where it is, you only have to ask. You understand by now that Ludmilla, for all her mild manner, likes to take the situation in hand and decide everything herself: your only course is to follow her.

You arrive punctually at the university, you pick your way past the young men and girls sitting on the steps, you wander bewildered among those austere walls which students' hands have arabesqued with outsize capital writing and detailed graffiti, just as the cavemen felt the need to decorate the cold walls of their caves to become masters of the tormenting mineral alienness, to make them familiar, empty them into their own inner space, annex them to the physical reality of living. Reader, we are not sufficiently acquainted for me to know whether you move with indifferent assurance in a university or whether old traumas or pondered choices make a universe of pupils and teachers seem a nightmare to your sensitive and sensible soul. In any case, nobody knows the department you are looking for, they send you from the basement to the fifth floor, each door you open is the wrong one, you withdraw in confusion, you seem to be lost in the book with white pages, unable to get out of it.

A lanky young man comes forward, in a long sweater.



* * *



As soon as he sees you, he points a finger at you and says, "You're waiting for Ludmilla!"

"How do you know that?"

"Irealized. One look is enough for me."

"Did Ludmilla send you?"

"No, but I'm always wandering around, I meet this one and I meet that one, I hear something here and see something there, and I naturally put them together."

"Do you also know where I'm supposed to go?"

"If you like, I'll take you to Uzzi-Tuzii. Either Ludmilla has been there for a while already or she'll come late."

This young man, so extroverted and well informed, is named Irnerio. You can call him tu, since he already calls you that. "Are you a student of the professor's?"

"I'm not a student of anything. I know where he is because I used to pick up Ludmilla there."

"Then Ludmilla's the one who studies in the department?"

"No, Ludmilla has always looked for places where she could hide."

"Who from?"

"Oh, from everybody."

Irnerio's answers are a bit evasive, but it would seem that it is chiefly her sister that Ludmilla tries to avoid. If she hasn't arrived punctually at our appointment, it is so as not to meet Lotaria in the hall; she has her seminar at this hour.

But you, on the contrary, believe there are some exceptions to this incompatibility between the sisters, at least as far as the telephone is concerned. You should make this Irnerio talk a bit more, see if he really is as knowledgeable as all that.

"Are you a friend of Ludmilla's, or of Lotaria's?"

"Ludmilla's, of course. But I manage to talk with Lotaria, too."

"Doesn't she criticize the books you read?"



* * *



"Me? I don't read books!" Irnerio says.

"What do you read, then?"

"Nothing. I've become so accustomed to not reading that I don't even read what appears before my eyes. It's not easy: they teach us to read as children, and for the rest of our lives we remain the slaves of all the written stuff they fling in front of us. I may have had to make some effort myself, at first, to learn not to read, but now it comes quite naturally to me. The secret is not refusing to look at the written words. On the contrary, you must look at them, intensely, until they disappear."

Irnerio's eyes have broad, pale, flickering pupils; they seem eyes that miss nothing, like those of a native of the forest, devoted to hunting and gathering.

"Then would you mind telling me why you come to the university?"

"Why shouldn't I? There are people going and coming, you meet, you talk. That's the reason I come here; I don't know about the others."

You try to picture how the world might appear, this world dense with writing that surrounds us on all sides, to someone who has learned not to read. And at the same time you ask yourself what bond there may be between Ludmilla and the Nonreader, and suddenly it seems to you that it is their very distance that keeps them together, and you can't stifle a feeling of jealousy.

You would like to question Irnerio further, but you have arrived, by some back stairs, at a low door with a Sign, DEPARTMENT OF BOTHNO-UGARIC LANGUAGES AND LITERATURES. Irnerio knocks sharply, says "Ciao" to you, and leaves you there.

The door opens, barely a crack. From the spots of whitewash on the jamb, and from the cap that appears, over a fleece-lined work jacket, you get the notion that the place is closed for renovation, and there is only a painter inside or a cleaning man.



* * *



"Is Professor Uzzi-Tuzii in?"

The gaze that assents, from beneath the cap, is different from what you would expect of a painter: the eyes of one preparing to leap over a precipice, who is projecting himself mentally to the other side, staring straight ahead, and avoiding looking down or sideways.

"Are you he?" you ask, though you have realized it can be no one else.

The little man does not widen the crack. "What do you want?"

"Excuse me, it was about some information... We telephoned you... Miss Ludmilla... Is Miss Ludmilla here?"

"There is no Miss Ludmilla here..." the Professor says, stepping back, and he points to the crammed bookshelves on the walls, the illegible names and titles on the spines and title pages, like a bristling hedge without gaps. "Why are you looking for her in my office?" And while you remember what Irnerio said, that for Ludmilla this was a place to hide, Uzzi-Tuzii seems to underline, with a gesture, the narrowness of his office, as if to say: Seek for yourself, if you think she's here. As if he felt the need to defend himself from the charge of keeping Ludmilla hidden there.

"We were to come together," you say, to make everything clear.

"Then why isn't she with you?" And this observation, logical for that matter, is also made in a suspicious tone.

"She'll be here soon..." you insist, but you say it with an almost interrogative note, as if you were asking Uzzi-Tuzii to confirm Ludmilla's habits, of which you know nothing, whereas he might know a great deal more. "You know Ludmilla, don't you, Professor?"

"I know... Why do you ask me?... What are you trying to find out?..." He becomes nervous. "Are you interested in Cimmerian literature or—" And he seems to



* * *



mean "or Ludmilla?" But he doesn't finish the sentence; and to be sincere you should answer that you can no longer distinguish your interest in the Cimmerian novel from your interest in the Other Reader of that novel. Now, moreover, the professor's reactions at the name Ludmilla, coming after Irnerio's confidences, cast mysterious flashes of light, create about the Other Reader an apprehensive curiosity not unlike that which binds you to Zwida Ozkart, in the novel whose continuation you are hunting for, and also to Madame Marne in the novel you had begun to read the day before and have temporarily put aside, and here you are in pursuit of all these shadows together, those of the imagination and those of life.

"I wanted ... we wanted to ask you if there is a Cimmerian author who..."

"Be seated," the professor says, suddenly placated, or, rather, again caught up in a more stable and persistent concern that re-emerges, dissolving marginal and ephemeral concerns.

The room is cramped, the walls covered with shelves, plus another bookcase that, having no place to lean against, is in the midst of the room dividing the scant space, so the professor's desk and the chair on which you are to sit are separated by a kind of wing, and to see each other you must stretch your necks.

"We are confined in this sort of closet.... The university expands and we contract.... We are the poor stepchild of living languages.... If Cimmerian can still be considered a living language... But this is precisely its value!" he exclaims with an affirmative outburst that immediately fades. "The fact that it is a modern language and a dead language at the same time ... A privileged position, even if nobody realizes..."

"You have few students?" you ask.

"Who do you think would come? Who do you think remembers the Cimmerians any more? In the field of sup-



* * *



pressed languages there are many now that attract more attention... Basque... Breton... Romany.... They all sign up for those.... Not that they study the language: nobody wants to do that these days.... They want problems to debate, general ideas to connect with other general ideas. My colleagues adjust, follow the mainstream, give their courses titles like 'Sociology of Welsh,' 'Psycho-linguistics of Provençal."... With Cimmerian it can't be done."

"Why not?"

"The Cimmerians have disappeared, as if the earth had swallowed them up." He shakes his head, apparently to summon all his patience and repeat something already said a hundred times. "This is a dead department of a dead literature in a dead language. Why should they study Cimmerian today? I'm the first to understand, I'm the first to say it: if you don't want to come, then don't come; as far as I'm concerned, the department could even be abolished. But to come here only to... No, that's too much."

"Only to—what?"

"Everything. I'm forced to see everything. For weeks on end nobody comes, but when somebody does come it's to do things that. . . You could remain well away from here, I say, what could interest you in these books written in the language of the dead? But they do it deliberately, let's go to Bothno-Ugaric languages, they say, let's go to Uzzi-Tuzii, and so I'm involved, forced to see, to participate...."

"In what?" you inquire, thinking of Ludmilla, who came here, who hid here, perhaps with Irnerio, with others.

"In everything... Perhaps there is something that attracts them, this uncertainty between life and death, perhaps this is what they feel, without understanding. They come here to do what they do, but they don't sign up for



* * *



the course, they don't attend classes, nobody ever takes an interest in the literature of the Cimmerians, buried in the books on these shelves as if in the graves of a cemetery...."

"I was, in fact, interested in it.... I had come to ask if there exists a Cimmerian novel that begins... No, the best way is to tell you right off the names of the characters: Gritzvi and Zwida, Ponko and Brigd. The action begins at Kudgiwa, but perhaps this is only the name of a farm; then I believe it shifts to Pëtkwo, oh the Aagd...."

"Oh, that can be found quickly!" the professor exclaims, and in one second he is freed from his hypochondriacal fog and glows like an electric bulb. "It is unquestionably Leaning from the steep slope, the only novel left us by one of the most promising Cimmerian poets of the first quarter of our century, Ukko Ahti.... Here it is!" And with the leap of a fish swimming against rapids he aims at a precise spot on a shelf, grasps a slim volume bound in green, slaps it to dispel the dust. "It has never been translated into any other language. The difficulties, to be sure, are enough to discourage anyone. Listen: 'I am addressing the conviction...' No: 'I am convincing myself to transmit...' You will note that both verbs are in the present progressive."

One thing is immediately clear to you: namely that this book has nothing in common with the one you had begun. Only some proper names are identical, a detail that is surely very odd, but which you do not stop to ponder, because gradually, from Uzzi-Tuzii's laborious extempore translation the outline of a story is taking shape, from his toilsome deciphering of verbal lumps a flowing narrative emerges.



* * *



Leaning from the steep slope

I am becoming convinced that the world wants to tell me something, send me messages, signals, warnings. I have noticed this ever since I have been in Pëtkwo. Every morning I leave the Kudgiwa Pension for my usual walk as far as the harbor. I go past the meteorological observatory, and I think of the end of the world which is approaching, or, rather, which has been in progress for a long while. If the end of the world could be localized in a precise spot, it would be the meteorological observatory of Pëtkwo: a corrugated-iron roof that rests on four somewhat shaky poles and houses, lined up on a shelf, some recording barometers, hygrometers, and thermographs, with their rolls of lined paper, which turn with a slow clockwork ticking against an oscillating nib. The vane of an anemometer at the top of a tall antenna and the squat funnel of a pluviometer complete the fragile equipment of the observatory, which, isolated on the edge of an escarpment in the municipal garden, against the pearl-gray sky, uniform and motionless, seems a trap for cyclones, a lure set there to attract waterspouts from the remote tropical



* * *



oceans, offering itself already as the ideal relict of the fury of the hurricanes.

There are days when everything I see seems to me charged with meaning: messages it would be difficult for me to communicate to others, define, translate into words, but which for this very reason appear to me decisive. They are announcements or presages that concern me and the world at once: for my part, not only the external events of my existence but also what happens inside, in the depths of me; and for the world, not some particular event but the general way of being of all things. You will understand therefore my difficulty in speaking about it, except by allusion.

Monday. Today I saw a hand thrust out of a window of the prison, toward the sea. I was walking on the seawall of the port, as is my habit, until I was just below the old fortress. The fortress is entirely enclosed by its oblique walls; the windows, protected by double or triple grilles, seem blind. Even knowing that prisoners are confined in there, I have always looked on the fortress as an element of inert nature, of the mineral kingdom. Therefore the appearance of the hand amazed me, as if it had emerged from the cliff. The hand was in an unnatural position; I suppose the windows are set high in the cells and cut out of the wall; the prisoner must have performed an acrobat's feat—or, rather, a contortionist's—to get his arm through grille after grille, to wave his hand in the free air. It was not a prisoner's signal to me, or to anyone else; at any rate I did not take it as such; indeed, then and there I did not think of the prisoners at all; I must say that the hand seemed white and slender to me, a hand not unlike my own, in which nothing suggested the roughness one would expect in a convict. For me it was like a sign coming from the stone: the stone wanted to inform me that our substance was common, and therefore something of what



* * *



constitutes my person would remain, would not be lost with the end of the world; a communication will still be possible in the desert bereft of life, bereft of my life and all memory of me. I am telling the first impressions I noted, which are the ones that count.

Today I reached the belvedere from which you can glimpse, down below, a little stretch of beach, deserted, facing the gray sea. The wicker chairs with their high curved backs, like baskets, against the wind, arranged in a semicircle, seemed to suggest a world in which the human race has disappeared and things can do nothing but bespeak its absence. I felt a kind of vertigo, as if I were merely plunging from one world to another, and in each I arrived shortly after the end of the world had taken place.

I passed the belvedere again half an hour later. From one chair, its back to me, a little ribbon was flapping. I went down the steep promontory path, as far as a shelf from which the angle of vision changed. As I expected, seated in the chair, completely hidden by the wicker shields, there was Miss Zwida, in her white straw hat, her drawing pad open on her lap; she was copying a seashell. I was not pleased to see her; this morning's negative signs dissuaded me from striking up a conversation; for about three weeks now I have been encountering her alone in my walks on the cliffs and the dunes, and I want nothing more than to address her—indeed, it is with this intention that I come down from my pension every day, but every day something deters me.

Miss Zwida is staying at the Hotel of the Sea Lily; I went there to ask the desk clerk her name. Perhaps she found out; holiday people at this season in Pëtkwo are very few; the young ones could be counted on your fingers. Encountering me so often, she is perhaps expecting me to address her one day.

The motives that constitute an obstacle to a possible meeting between the two of us are several. In the first



* * *



place, Miss Zwida collects and draws seashells; I had a beautiful collection of shells, years ago, when I was a boy, but then I gave it up and have forgotten everything: classifications, morphology, geographical distribution of the various species. A conversation with Miss Zwida would lead me inevitably to talk about seashells, and I cannot decide what attitude to take, whether to pretend absolute ignorance or to call on a remote experience now vague; it is my relationship with my life, consisting of things never concluded and half erased, that the subject of seashells forces me to contemplate; hence the uneasiness that finally puts me to flight.

In addition there is the fact that this girl's application in drawing seashells denotes in her a search for formal perfection which the world can and therefore must attain; I, on the contrary, have been convinced for some time that perfection is not produced except marginally and by chance; therefore it deserves no interest at all, the true nature of things being revealed only in disintegration. If I were to approach Miss Zwida, I would have to express some appreciation of her drawings—which are of highly refined quality, for that matter, as far as I have been able to see—and therefore, at least at first, I would have to pretend to agree with an aesthetic and moral ideal that I reject, or else declare my feelings at the very start, with the risk of wounding her.

Third obstacle: the condition of my health, which, though much improved thanks to this stay by the sea on doctors' orders, affects my opportunities to go out and meet strangers; I am still subject to intermittent attacks, and especially to periodic worsening of a tiresome eczema, which discourages me from any notion of sociability.

Every now and then I exchange a few words with the meteorologist, Mr. Kauderer, when I meet him at the observatory. Mr. Kauderer always goes by at noon, to check the readings. He is a tall, thin man, with a gloomy



* * *



face, a bit like an American Indian. He rides along on his bicycle, staring straight ahead, as if maintaining his balance on the seat demanded all his concentration. He props his bicycle against the shed, slips a bag from the handlebars, and takes from it a ledger with broad, short pages. He climbs the steps to the platform and marks down the figures recorded by the instruments, some in pencil, others with a thick fountain pen, never relaxing his concentration for a second. He wears knickerbockers under a long topcoat; all his clothing is gray, or black-and-white check, including his visored cap. It is only when he has concluded these operations that he notices me observing him and greets me cordially.

I have come to realize that Mr. Kauderer's presence is important for me: that someone still evinces so much scrupulousness and methodical attention, though I know perfectly well it is all futile, has a reassuring effect on me, perhaps because it makes up for my vague way of living, about which—despite the conclusions I have reached—I continue to feel guilty. Therefore I stop and watch the meteorologist, and even converse with him, though it is not the conversation in itself that interests me. He talks to me about the weather, naturally, in detailed technical terms, and of the effects of the swings of pressure on the health, but also of the unsettled times in which we live, citing as example some episodes of local life or even news items he has read in the papers. At these moments he reveals a less reserved character than appears at first sight; indeed, he tends to warm to his subject and become verbose, especially in disapproving of the majority's way of acting and thinking, because he is a man who tends to be dissatisfied.

Today Mr. Kauderer told me that, because he is planning to go away for a few days, he will have to find someone to take his place in recording the data, but he does not know anyone he can trust. In the course of the conver-



* * *



sation he asked me if I would be interested in learning to read the meteorological instruments, in which case he would teach me. I did not answer yes or no, or at least I did not mean to give a precise answer, but I found myself beside him on the platform while he was explaining how to establish the maximum and the minimum, the progress of the pressure, the amount of precipitation, the velocity of the winds. In short, almost without my realizing it, he entrusted me with the job of replacing him for the next few days, starting tomorrow at noon. Though my acceptance was a bit forced, since I was given no time to reflect or to suggest that I could not make up my mind on the spot, this assignment does not displease me.

Tuesday. This morning I spoke for the first time with Miss Zwida. The job of recording the meteorological readings certainly had a part in helping me overcome my hesitation, in the sense that, for the first time during my days at Pëtkwo, there was something previously established that I could not avoid; so that, however our conversation might go, at a quarter to twelve I would say, "Ah, I almost forgot: I must rush along to the observatory, because it is time to record the readings." And I would take my leave, perhaps reluctantly, perhaps with relief, but in any event with the certainty that I could not do otherwise. I believe I already understood vaguely yesterday, when Mr. Kauderer made me the offer, that this assignment would encourage me to speak with Miss Zwida, but only now has the matter become clear to me—assuming that it is clear.

Miss Zwida was drawing a sea urchin. She was seated on a folding stool, on the pier. The sea urchin was lying on a rock, open; it contracted its prickles trying in vain to right itself. The girl's drawing was a study of the mollusk's soft pulp, as it dilated and contracted, rendered in chiaroscuro, and with thick, bristling cross-hatching all around. The speech I had in mind, on the form of seashells as a



* * *



deceptive harmony, a container concealing the true substance of nature, was no longer apposite. The sight of both the sea urchin and the drawing transmitted unpleasant and cruel sensations, like viscera exposed to the gaze. I struck up a conversation by saying that there was nothing harder to draw than a sea urchin: whether the container of prickles was seen from above, or whether the mollusk was overturned, despite the radial symmetry of its structure, it offered few pretexts for a linear rendering. She answered that she was interested in drawing it because it was an image that recurred in her dreams, and she wanted to rid herself of it. Taking my leave, I asked if we could see each other tomorrow morning at the same place. She said that tomorrow she had other engagements, but that the day after tomorrow she would be going out again with her drawing pad and I might easily meet her.

As I was checking the barometers, two men approached the shed. I had never seen them: bundled in heavy coats, dressed all in black, their collars turned up. They asked me whether Mr. Kauderer was there, then where had he gone, did I know his address, when he would be back. I answered that I didn't know and asked who they were and why they asked.

"It's not important," they said, going away.

Wednesday. I went to the hotel to leave a bunch of violets for Miss Zwida. The desk clerk told me she had gone out early. I wandered around for a long time, hoping to run into her. In the yard before the fortress was the line of the prisoners' relatives: this is visiting day at the prison. In the midst of the humble women with kerchiefs on their heads and the crying children I saw Miss Zwida. Her face was covered by a black veil under the brim of her hat, but her demeanor was unmistakable: she stood with her head high, her neck straight and somehow haughty.

In a corner of the yard, as if observing the line at the



* * *



door of the prison, were the two men in black who had questioned me yesterday at the observatory.

The sea urchin, the little veil, the two strangers: the color black continues to appear to me in circumstances bound to attract my attention, messages that I interpret as a summons from the night. I realize that for a long time I have tended to reduce the presence of darkness in my life. The doctors' prohibition of going out after sunset has confined me for months within the boundaries of the daytime world. But this is not all: the fact is that I find in the day's light, in this diffused, pale, almost shadowless luminosity, a darkness deeper than the night's.

Wednesday evening. Every evening I spend the first hours of darkness penning these pages, which I do not know if anyone will ever read. The pâte de verre globe in my room at the Kudgiwa Pension illuminates the flow of my writing, perhaps too nervous for a future reader to decipher. Perhaps this diary will come to light many, many years after my death, when our language will have undergone who knows what transformations, and some of the words and expressions I use normally will seem outdated and of ambiguous meaning. In any case, the person who finds this diary will have one certain advantage over me: with a written language it is always possible to reconstruct a dictionary and a grammar, isolate sentences, transcribe them or paraphrase them in another language, whereas I am trying to read in the succession of things presented to me every day the world's intentions toward me, and I grope my way, knowing that there can exist no dictionary that will translate into words the burden of obscure allusions that lurks in these things. I would like this hovering of presentiments and suspicions to reach the person who reads me not as an accidental obstacle to understanding what I write, but as its very substance; and if the process of my thoughts seems elusive to him who,



* * *



setting out from radically changed mental habits, will seek to follow it, the important thing is that I convey to him the effort I am making to read between the lines of things the evasive meaning of what is in store for me.

Thursday. Thanks to a special permit from the director's office—Miss Zwida explained to me—she can enter the prison on visitors' day and sit at the table in the parlor with her drawing pad and her charcoal. The simple humanity of the prisoners' relatives offers some interesting subjects for studies from life.

I had asked her no question, but since she had realized that I saw her yesterday in the yard, she felt it her duty to explain her presence in that place. I would have preferred her to tell me nothing, because I feel no attraction toward drawings of human figures and I would not have known how to comment on them if she had shown them to me, an eventuality that, however, did not occur. I thought those drawings were perhaps kept in a special album, which she left in the prison office between times, since yesterday—I recalled clearly—she did not have with her the inseparable bound album or her pencil box.

"If I knew how to draw, I would apply myself only to studying the form of inanimate objects," I said somewhat imperiously, because I wanted to change the subject and also because a natural inclination does truly lead me to recognize my moods in the motionless suffering of things.

Miss Zwida proved at once to be in agreement: the object she would have drawn most willingly, she said, was one of those little anchors with four flukes, known as "grapnels," which the fishing boats use. She pointed some out to me as we passed the boats tied up at the dock, and she explained to me the difficulty that the four barbs represented for anyone wanting to draw them in their various angles and perspectives. I understood that the object contained a message for me, and I should decipher it: the



* * *



anchor, an exhortation to attach myself, to cling, to delve, to end my fluctuating condition, my remaining on the surface. But such an interpretation left room for doubts: this could also be an invitation to cast off, to set forth toward the open sea. Something in the grapnel's form, the four hooked teeth, the four iron arms worn by the scraping against the rock of the seabed, warned me that no decision would preclude laceration and suffering. Still, I could be relieved that it was not a heavy, ocean-going anchor, but a light little anchor: I was not therefore being asked to renounce the open-mindedness of youth, but only to linger for a moment, to reflect, to sound out the darkness of myself. "To be able to draw this object at my leisure from every point of view," Zwida said, "I should have one that I could keep with me and become familiar with. Do you think I could buy one from a fisherman?"

"We can ask," I said.

"Why do you not try to purchase one? I dare not do it myself, because a young lady from the city who shows interest in a crude fishermen's implement would arouse some wonder."

I saw myself in the act of presenting her with the iron grapnel as if it were a bunch of flowers: the image in its incongruity had a strident, fierce quality. Certainly a meaning was hidden there that eluded me; and, vowing to meditate on it calmly, I answered yes.

"I would like the grapnel with its hawser attached," Zwida specified. "I can spend hours drawing a heap of coiled rope. So ask for a very long rope: ten—no, twelve— meters."

Thursday evening. The doctors have given me permission to consume alcoholic beverages in moderation. To celebrate the news, at sunset I entered the tavern, The Star of Sweden, to have a cup of hot rum. At the bar there were fishermen, customs agents, day laborers. Over all



* * *



their voices rang out the voice of one elderly man in the uniform of a prison guard, who was boasting drunkenly through the sea of chatter. "And every Wednesday the perfumed young lady slips me a hundred-crown note to leave her alone with the convict. And by Thursday the hundred crowns are already gone in so much beer. And when the visiting hour is over, the young lady comes out with the stink of jail in her elegant clothes; and the prisoner goes back to his cell with the lady's perfume in his jailbird's suit. And I'm left with the smell of beer. Life is nothing but trading smells."

"Life and also death, you might say," interjected another drunk, whose profession, as I learned at once, was gravedigger. "With the smell of beer I try to get the smell of death off me. And only the smell of death will get the smell of beer off you, like all the drinkers whose graves I have to dig."

I took this dialogue as a warning to be on guard: the world is falling apart and tries to lure me into its disintegration.

Friday. The fisherman had become suspicious all of a sudden: "What do you need it for? What use do you have for a grapnel?"

These were indiscreet questions; I should have answered, "To draw it," but I knew Miss Zwida's shyness about revealing her artistic activity in an environment incapable of appreciating it; besides, the right answer, on my part, would have been, "To think about it," so just imagine whether I would have been understood.

"That is my business," I answered. We had started out conversing amiably, since we had met the night before at the tavern, but all of a sudden our dialogue had turned curt.

"Go to a ship's chandler," the fisherman said, brusquely. "I do not sell my belongings."

With the shopkeeper the same thing happened: as soon



* * *



as I asked my question, his face turned grim. "We can't sell such things to foreigners," he said. "We want no trouble with the police. And with a rope twelve meters long into the bargain... Not that I suspect you, but it would not be the first time somebody threw a grapnel up to the

bars of the prison, to help a prisoner escape..."

"Escape" is one of those words I cannot hear without abandoning myself to endless ruminations. The search for the anchor in which I am engaged seems to indicate to me an avenue of escape, perhaps of a metamorphosis, a resurrection. With a shudder I dismiss the thought that the prison is my mortal body and the escape that awaits me the separation of the soul, the beginning of a life beyond this earth.

Saturday. It was my first outing at night after many months, and this caused me no little apprehension, especially because of the head colds to which I am subject; so before going out, I put on a balaclava helmet and over it a wool cap and, over that, a felt hat. Bundled up like this, and moreover with a scarf around my neck and another around my waist, a woolen jacket, a fur jacket, a leather coat, and lined boots, I could recover a certain security. The night, as I was then able to ascertain, was mild and serene. But I still failed to understand why Mr. Kauderer felt impelled to make an appointment with me at the cemetery, in the heart of the night, through a mysterious note delivered to me in great secrecy. If he had come back, why could we not meet as we had every day? And if he had not come back, whom was I on my way to meet at the cemetery?

To open the gate for me there was the gravedigger I had already met at The Star of Sweden. "I am looking for Mr. Kauderer," I said to him.

He answered, "Mr. Kauderer is not here. But since the cemetery is the home of those who are not here, come in."



* * *



I was proceeding among the gravestones when a swift, rustling shadow grazed me; it braked and got down from the seat. "Mr. Kauderer!" I exclaimed, amazed at seeing him ride around on his bicycle among the graves, his headlight turned off.

"Ssssh," he silenced me. "You are committing serious imprudences. When I entrusted the observatory to you, I did not suppose you would compromise yourself in an escape attempt. I must tell you we are opposed to individual escapes. You have to know how to wait. We have a more general plan to carry forward, a long-term plan."

Hearing him say "we" as he made a broad, sweeping gesture, I thought he was speaking in the name of the dead. It was the dead, whose spokesman Mr. Kauderer obviously was, who had declared they did not yet want to accept me among them. I felt an undeniable relief.

"It is also your fault that I shall have to prolong my absence," he added. "Tomorrow or the next day you will be summoned by the police chief, who will question you about the grapnel. Be very careful not to involve me in this business; bear in mind that the chief's questions will all be aimed at making you confess something involving me. You know nothing about me, except that I am traveling and I have not told you when I will be back. You can say that I asked you to take my place in recording the readings for a few days only. For that matter, starting tomorrow, you are relieved of the duty of going to the observatory."

"No! Not that!" I cried, gripped by a sudden desperation, as if at that moment I had realized that only the checking of the meteorological instruments enabled me to master the forces of the universe and recognize an order in it.

Sunday. Early in the morning, I went to the meteorological observatory, I climbed on the platform, and I



* * *



stood there listening to the tick of the recording instruments, like the music of the celestial spheres. The wind sped through the morning sky, transporting soft clouds; the clouds arrayed themselves in cirrus festoons, then in cumuli; toward nine-thirty there was a rain shower, and the pluviometer collected a few centiliters; there followed a partial rainbow, of brief duration; the sky darkened again, the nib of the barograph descended, tracing an almost vertical line; the thunder rumbled and the hail rattled. From my position up there I felt as if I had the storms and the clear skies in my hand, the thunderbolts and the mists: not like a god, no, do not believe me mad, I did not feel I was Zeus the Thunderer, but a bit like a conductor who has before him a score already written and who knows that the sounds rising from the instruments correspond to a pattern of which he is the principal curator and possessor. The corrugated-iron roof resounded like a drum beneath the downpour; the anemometer spun; that universe all crashes and leaps was translatable into figures to be lined up in my ledger; a supreme calm presided over the texture of the cataclysms.

In that moment of harmony and fullness, a creak made me look down. Huddled between the steps of the platform and the supporting poles of the shed was a bearded man, dressed in a rough, striped tunic, soaked with rain. He was looking at me with pale, steady eyes.

"I have escaped," he said. "Do not betray me. You must go and inform someone. Will you? This person is at the Hotel of the Sea Lily."

I sensed at once that in the perfect order of the universe a breach had opened, an irreparable rent.



* * *



[4]

Listening to someone read aloud is very different from reading in silence. When you read, you can stop or skip sentences: you are the one who sets the pace. When someone else is reading, it is difficult to make your attention coincide with the tempo of his reading: the voice goes either too fast or too slow.

And then, listening to someone who is translating from another language involves a fluctuation, a hesitation over the words, a margin of indecision, something vague, tentative. The text, when you are the reader, is something that is there, against which you are forced to clash; when someone translates it aloud to you, it is something that is and is not there, that you cannot manage to touch.

Furthermore, Professor Uzzi-Tuzii had begun his oral translation as if he were not quite sure he could make the words hang together, going back over every sentence to iron out the syntactical creases, manipulating the phrases until they were not completely rumpled, smoothing them, clipping them, stopping at every word to illustrate its idiomatic uses and its connotations, accompanying himself with inclusive gestures as if inviting you to be content with approximate equivalents, breaking off to state grammatical rules, etymological derivations, quoting the classics. But just when you are convinced that for the professor philology and erudition mean more than what the story is telling, you realize the opposite is true: that academic envelope serves only to protect everything the story says and does not say, an inner afflatus always on the verge of being dispersed at contact with the air, the echo of a vanished knowledge revealed in the penumbra and in tacit allusions.

Torn between the necessity to interject glosses on mul-



* * *



tiple meanings of the text and the awareness that all interpretation is a use of violence and caprice against a text, the professor, when faced by the most complicated passages, could find no better way of aiding comprehension than to read them in the original. The pronunciation of that unknown language, deduced from theoretical rules, not transmitted by the hearing of voices with their individual accents, not marked by the traces of use that shapes and transforms, acquired the absoluteness of sounds that expect no reply, like the song of the last bird of an extinct species or the strident roar of a just-invented jet plane that shatters in the sky on its first test flight.

Then, little by little, something started moving and flowing between the sentences of this distraught recitation. The prose of the novel had got the better of the uncertainties of the voice; it had become fluent, transparent, continuous; Uzzi-Tuzii swam in it like a fish, accompanying himself with gestures (he held his hands open like flippers), with the movement of his lips (which allowed the words to emerge like little air bubbles), with his gaze (his eyes scoured the page like a fish's eyes scouring the seabed, but also like the eyes of an aquarium visitor as he follows a fish's movements in an illuminated tank).

Now, around you, there is no longer the room of the department, the shelves, the professor: you have entered the novel, you see that Nordic beach, you follow the footsteps of the delicate gentleman. You are so absorbed that it takes you a while to become aware of a presence at your side. Out of the corner of your eye you glimpse Ludmilla. She is there, seated on a pile of folio volumes, also completely caught up in listening to the continuation of the novel.

Has she just arrived at this moment, or did she hear the beginning? Did she enter silently, without knocking? Was she already here, hidden among these shelves? (She came



* * *



here to hide, Irnerio said. They come here to do unspeakable things, Uzzi-Tuzii said). Or is she an apparition summoned by the spell released through the words of the professor-sorcerer?

He continues his recitation, Uzzi-Tuzii, and shows no sign of surprise at the presence of the new listener, as if she had always been there. Nor does he react with a start when she, hearing him pause longer than the other times, asks him, "And then?"

The professor snaps the book shut. "Then nothing. Leaning from the steep slope breaks off here. Having written these first pages of his novel, Ukko Ahti sank into a deep depression which, in the space of a few years, led him to three unsuccessful suicide attempts and one that succeeded. The fragment was published in the collection of his posthumous writings, along with scattered verses, an intimate diary, and his notes for an essay on the incarnation of Buddha. Unfortunately, it was impossible to find any plan or sketch explaining how Ahti intended to develop the plot. Though incomplete, or perhaps for this very reason, Leaning from the steep slope is the most representative work of Cimmerian prose, for what it reveals and even more for what it hides, for its reticence, withdrawal, its disappearing...."

The professor's voice seems about to die away. You crane your neck, to make sure he is still there, beyond the bookcase-partition that separates him from your vision, but you are no longer able to glimpse him; perhaps he has ducked into the hedge of academic publications and bound collections of reviews, growing thinner and thinner until he can slip into the interstices greedy for dust, perhaps overwhelmed by the erasing destiny that looms over the object of his studies, perhaps engulfed by the empty chasm of the brusque interruption of the novel. On the edge of this chasm you would like to take your stand, supporting Ludmilla or clinging to her; your hands try to grasp her hands....



* * *



"Don't ask where the rest of this book is!" It is a shrill cry that comes from an undefined spot among the shelves. "All books continue in the beyond...." The professor's voice goes up and down; where has he got to? Perhaps he is rolling around beneath the desk, perhaps he is hanging himself from the lamp in the ceiling.

"Continue where?" you ask, perched on the edge of the precipice. "Beyond what?"

"Books are the steps of the threshold.... All Cimmerian authors have passed it.... Then the wordless language of the dead begins, which says the things that only the language of the dead can say. Cimmerian is the last language of the living, the language of the threshold! You come here to try to listen there, beyond....Listen...."

But you are no longer listening to anything, the two of you. You have also disappeared, flattened in a corner, one clinging to the other. Is this your answer? Do you want to demonstrate that the living also have a wordless language, with which books cannot be written but which can only be lived, second by second, which cannot be recorded or remembered? First comes this wordless language of living bodies—is this the premise you wish Uzzi-Tuzii would take into account?—then the words books are written with, and attempts to translate that first language are vain; then...

"Cimmerian books are all unfinished," Uzzi-Tuzii sighs, "because they continue beyond ... in the other language, in the silent language to which all the words we believe we read refer...."

"Believe.... Why believe? I like to read, really to read." It is Ludmilla who is speaking like this, with conviction and warmth. She is seated opposite the professor, dressed in a simple, elegant fashion, in light colors. Her way of living in the world, filled with interest in what the world can give her, dismisses the egocentric abyss of the suicide's novel that ends by sinking into itself. In her voice you seek the confirmation of your need to cling to the things



* * *



that exist, to read what is written and nothing else, dispelling the ghosts that escape your grasp. (Even if your embrace—confess it—occurred only in your imagination, it is still an embrace that can happen at any moment....)

But Ludmilla is always at least one step ahead of you. "I like to know that books exist that I will still be able to read..." she says, sure that existent objects, concrete albeit unknown, must correspond to the strength of her desire. How can you keep up with her, this woman who is always reading another book besides the one before her eyes, a book that does not yet exist, but which, since she wants it, cannot fail to exist?

The professor is there at his desk; in the cone of light from a desk lamp his hands surface, suspended, or barely resting on the closed volume, as if in a sad caress.

"Reading," he says, "is always this: there is a thing that is there, a thing made of writing, a solid, material object, which cannot be changed, and through this thing we measure ourselves against something else that is not present, something else that belongs to the immaterial, invisible world, because it can only be thought, imagined, or because it was once and is no longer, past, lost, unattainable, in the land of the dead...."

"Or that is not present because it does not yet exist, something desired, feared, possible or impossible," Ludmilla says. "Reading is going toward something that is about to be, and no one yet knows what it will be...." (There, now you see the Other Reader leaning forward to peer beyond the edge of the printed page at the ships of the rescuers or the invaders appearing on the horizon, the storms....) "The book I would like to read now is a novel in which you sense the story arriving like still-vague thunder, the historical story along with the individual's story, a novel that gives the sense of living through an upheaval that still has no name, has not yet taken shape...."



* * *



"Well said, sister dear, I see you're making progress!" Among the shelves a girl has appeared, with a long neck and a bird's face, a steady, bespectacled gaze, a great clump of curly hair; she is dressed in a loose tunic and tight pants. "I was coming to tell you I had found the novel you were looking for, and it is the very one our seminar on the feminist revolution needs. You're invited, if you want to hear us analyze it and debate it!"

"Lotaria, you don't mean to tell me," Ludmilla exclaims, "that you, too, have come upon Leaning from the steep slope, the unfinished novel of Ukko Ahti, the Cimmerian writer!"

"You are misinformed, Ludmilla. That is the novel, but it isn't unfinished, and it isn't written in Cimmerian but in Cimbrian; the title was later changed to Without fear of wind or vertigo, and the author signed it with a different pseudonym, Vorts Viljandi."

"It's a fake!" Professor Uzzi-Tuzii cries. "It's a well-known case of forgery! The material is apocryphal, disseminated by the Cimbrian nationalists during the anti-Cimmerian propaganda campaign at the end of the First World War!"

Crowding behind Lotaria is the vanguard of a phalanx of young girls with limpid, serene eyes, slightly alarming eyes, perhaps because they are too limpid and serene. Among them a pale man forces his way, bearded, with a sarcastic gaze and a systematically disillusioned curl to his lips.

"I'm terribly sorry to contradict an illustrious colleague," he says, "but the authenticity of this text has been proved by the discovery of the manuscripts that the Cimmerians had hidden!"

"I am amazed, Galligani," Uzzi-Tuzii groans, "that you lend the authority of your chair in Erulo-Altaic languages and literatures to such a vulgar fraud! And, moreover, one



* * *



connected with territorial claims that have nothing to do with literature!"

"Uzzi-Tuzii, please," Professor Galligani retorts, "don't lower the debate to this level. You know very well that Cimbrian nationalism is quite remote from my interests, as I hope Cimmerian chauvinism is from yours. Comparing the spirit of the two literatures, I ask myself this question: who goes further in the negation of values?"

The Cimbro-Cimmerian debate does not seem to affect Ludmilla, now occupied with a single thought: the possibility that the interrupted novel might contìnue. "Can what Lotaria says be true?" she asks you in a whisper. "For once I wish she were right, that the beginning the professor read had a sequel, no matter in what language...."

"Ludmilla," Lotaria says, "we're going to our study group. If you want to follow the discussion of Viljandi's novel, come along. You can invite your friend, too, if he's interested."

Here you are, enrolled behind Lotaria's banner. The group takes its place in a classroom, around a table. You and Ludmilla would like to sit as close as possible to the bundle of manuscript Lotaria is holding before her, which seems to contain the novel in question.

"We have to thank Professor Galligani, of Cimbric literature," Lotaria begins, "for having kindly put at our disposal a rare copy of Without fear of wind or vertigo and for personally taking part in our seminar. I would like to underline this open attitude, which is all the more admirable when you compare it with the lack of understanding in other teachers of related disciplines...." And Lotaria gives her sister a look, to make sure she doesn't miss the hostile reference to Uzzi-Tuzii.

To put the novel in context, Galligani is asked to supply some historical notes. "I will confine myself to recalling,"



* * *



he says, "how the provinces that made up the Cimmerian state became, after the Second World War, part of the Cimbric People's Republic. Putting in order the documents of the Cimmerian archives, which had been scattered at the time of the fighting, the Cimbrians were able to re-evaluate the complex personality of a writer like Vorts Viljandi, who wrote both in Cimmerian and in Cimbric, but of whose works the Cimmerians published only those in their language—a scant number, for that matter. Far more important in quantity and in quality were the works in Cimbric, concealed by the Cimmerians, notably the vast novel Without fear of wind or vertigo, whose opening chapter apparently also exists in a first draft in Cimmerian, signed with the pseudonym Ukko Ahti. It is beyond dispute, in any case, that it was only after his definitive choice of the Cimbric language that the author found his genuine inspiration for this novel....

"I won't give you the whole history," the professor continues, "of the variable fortunes of this book in the Cimbric People's Republic. First published as a classic, translated also into German so that it could be disseminated abroad (this is the translation we are using now), it later suffered during the campaigns for ideological rectification, and was withdrawn from circulation and even from the libraries. We now believe, on the other hand, that its revolutionary content was far ahead of its time..."

You are impatient, you and Ludmilla, to see this lost book rise from its ashes, but you must wait until the girls and the young men of the study group have been handed out their assignments: during the reading there must be some who underline the reflections of production methods, others the processes of reification, others the sublimation of repression, others the sexual semantic codes, others the metalanguages of the body, others the transgression of roles, in politics and in private life.

And now Lotaria opens her folder, begins to read. The



* * *



barbed-wire fences dissolve like cobwebs. All follow in silence, you two and the others.

You immediately realize that you are listening to something that has no possible connection with Leaning from the steep slope or with Outside the town of Malbork or even with If on a winter's night a traveler. You exchange a quick glance, you and Ludmilla, or, rather, two glances: first questioning, then agreeing. Whatever it may be, this is a novel where, once you have got into it, you want to go forward, without stopping.



* * *



Without fear of wind or vertigo

At five in the morning, military vehicles crossed the city; outside the food stores lines began to form, housewives with tallow lanterns; on the walls the propaganda slogans, painted during the night by the teams of the various factions of the Provisional Council, were not yet dry.

When the band's musicians had put their instruments back in their cases and came out of the basement, the air was green. For part of the way the patrons of the New Titania walked in a group behind the musicians, as if reluctant to sever the bond that had formed in the club during the night among the people gathered there, by chance or habit, and they went forward in a single party, the men inside the turned-up collars of their overcoats, assuming a cadaverous look, like mummies brought into the open air from the sarcophagi, which, preserved for four thousand years, in a moment crumble to dust; but a wave of excitement, on the contrary, infected the women, who sang, each to herself, leaving their cloaks open over their low-cut evening dresses, swishing their long skirts through the puddles in unsteady dance movements,



* * *



thanks to that process peculiar to intoxication which makes a new euphoria bloom from the collapse and dulling of the previous euphoria, and in all of them there seemed to remain the hope that the party was not yet over, that the players at a certain point would stop in the middle of the street, reopen their cases, and again take out their saxophones and double basses.

Opposite the former Levinson Bank, guarded by squads of People's Guards with bayonets fixed and cockades on their caps, the party of night owls, as if the word had been given, broke up, and each went off his own way, not saying good-bye to anyone. The three of us were left together: Valerian and I took Irina by the arm, one on each side. I was always at Irina's right, to leave room for the holster of the heavy pistol I was wearing, hanging from my belt; as for Valerian, who was in civilian clothes since he was a member of the Heavy Industry Commission, if he was wearing a pistol—and I believe he had one—it was surely one of those flat ones you can carry in your pocket. Irina at that hour became silent, almost gloomy, and a kind of fear crept into us—I speak for myself, but I'm sure Valerian shared my mood, even if we never exchanged any confidences on the subject—because we felt this was when she truly took possession of the two of us, and however mad the things she would drive us to do once her magic circle had closed and imprisoned us, they would be nothing compared to what she was concocting now in her imagination, never pausing in the face of any excess, in the exploration of the senses, in mental elation, in cruelty. The truth is that we were all very young, too young for everything we were experiencing; I mean us men, because Irina had the precocity of women of her sort, even though in years she was the youngest of the three; and she made us do what she wanted.

She began whistling silently, Irina, with a smile in her eyes, as if savoring in advance an idea that had come to



* * *



her; then her whistle became audible, a comic march from an operetta then in fashion, and we, always a bit afraid of what she was preparing for us, began to follow her, also whistling, and we marched in step as if to an irresistible fanfare, feeling ourselves at once victims and victors.

This was as we passed the Church of Saint Apollonia, then transformed into a lazaretto for cholera patients, with the coffins displayed outside on sawhorses surrounded by great circles of lime so that people wouldn't approach, waiting for the cemetery "wagons. An old woman was praying, kneeling outside the church, and as we proceeded to the sound of our irresistible march, we almost trampled on her. She raised against us a little fist, withered and yellow, wrinkled as a chestnut, propping herself up with the other fist on the cobblestones, as she shouted, "Down with the gentry!" or, rather, "Down with! Gentry!" as if they were two curses, in crescendo, and as if in calling us gentry she considered us doubly cursed, and then a word in the local dialect that means "brothel people," and also something like "It will end"; but at that moment she noticed my uniform and was silent, hanging her head.

I am narrating this incident in all its details because— not immediately, but afterward—it was considered a premonition of everything that was to happen, and also because all these images of the period must cross the page like the army vehicles crossing the city (even if the words "army vehicles" evoke somewhat indefinite images; it's not bad for a certain indefiniteness to remain in the air, appropriate to the confusion of the period), like the canvas streamers hung between one building and the next to urge the citizenry to subscribe to the national loan, like the processions of workers whose routes must not coincide because they are organized by rival trade unions, one demonstrating in favor of the unlimited continuation of the strike in the Kauderer munitions factories, the other



* * *



for the end of the strike in order to assist arming the people against the counterrevolutionary armies about to surround the city. All these oblique lines, intersecting, should define the space where we moved, I and Valerian and Irina, where our story can emerge from nothingness, find a point of departure, a direction, a plot.

I had met Irina the day the front collapsed, less than twelve kilometers from the Eastern Gate. While the citizens' militia—boys under eighteen and old men from the reserves—was taking up a position around the low buildings of the Slaughterhouse—a place whose very name had a ring of ill omen, but we didn't yet know for whom—a flood of people was withdrawing into the city over the Iron Bridge. Peasant women balancing on their heads baskets with geese peeping out, hysterical pigs running off among the legs of the crowd, followed by yelling children (the hope of saving something from the army's requisitions drove the rural families to scatter their children and their hogs as much as possible, sending them off at random), soldiers on foot or on horseback who were deserting their units or trying to regain the body of the dispersed forces, elderly noblewomen at the head of caravans of maidservants and bundles, stretchers with the wounded, patients discharged from the hospitals, wandering peddlers, officials, monks, gypsies, pupils from the former College of Officers' Daughters in their traveling uniform—all were channeled through the grilles of the bridge as if swept along by the cold, damp wind that seemed to blow from the rents in the map, from the breaches that ripped fronts and frontiers. There were many that day seeking refuge in the city: those who feared the spreading of riots and looting and those instead who had their own good reasons for not being found in the path of the reactionary armies; those who sought protection under the fragile legality of the Provisional Council and those who wanted only to hide in the confusion in



* * *



order to act undisturbed against the law, whether new or old. Each felt his personal survival was at stake, and precisely where any talk of solidarity would have seemed out of place, because what counted was clawing and biting to clear a path for yourself, there was nevertheless a kind of common ground and understanding established, so that in the face of obstacles, efforts were united and all understood one another without too many words.

It may have been this, or it may have been that in general confusion youth recognizes itself and rejoices: whatever it was, crossing the Iron Bridge in the midst of the crowd that morning, I felt satisfied and lighthearted, in harmony with the others, with myself, and with the world, as I had not felt for a long time. (I would not like to use the wrong word; I will say, rather: I felt in harmony with the disharmony of others, myself, and the world.) I was already at the end of the bridge, where a flight of steps led to the shore and the river of people slowing down and jamming, forcing some to shove backward to avoid being pushed against those who were going down the steps more slowly—legless veterans who rested first on one crutch then on the other, horses led by the bit in a diagonal line so the iron of their hoofs would not slip on the edges of the iron steps, motorcycles with sidecars that had to be lifted and carried (they would have done better to take the Wagon Bridge, as the pedestrians did not fail to shout at them, inveighing, but this would have meant adding a good mile to the trip)—when I became aware of the girl who was coming down beside me.

She wore a cloak with fur at hem and cuffs, a broad-brimmed hat with a veil and a rose: not only young and attractive but also elegant, as I noticed immediately afterward. While I was looking at her obliquely, I saw her open her eyes wide, raise her gloved hand to her mouth which was gaping in a cry of terror, and then sink backward. She would surely have fallen and been trampled by



* * *



that crowd advancing like a herd of elephants if I had not been quick to grab her by the arm.

"Are you ill?" I said to her. "Lean on me. It's nothing, don't worry."

She was rigid, unable to take another step.

"The void, the void down below," she was saying. "Help ... vertigo ..."

There was nothing visible that could explain any vertigo, but the girl was truly panic-stricken.

"Don't look down, and hold on to my arm. Follow the others; we're already at the end of the bridge," I say to her, hoping that these are the right notions to reassure her.

And then she says, "I feel all these footsteps come loose from the stairs and move forward in the void, then plunge ... a crowd falling..." And she digs in her heels.

I look through the spaces between the iron steps at the colorless flow of the river down below, transporting chunks of ice like white clouds. In a distress that lasts an instant, I seem to be feeling what she feels: that every void continues in the void, every gap, even a short one, opens onto another gap, every chasm empties into the infinite abyss. I put my arm around her shoulders; I try to resist the shoves of those who want to proceed down, who curse at us: "Hey, let us past! Go do your hugging somewhere else! Shameless!" But the only way to elude the human landslide that is striking us would be to walk faster into the air, to fly.... There: I, too, feel suspended as if over a precipice....

Perhaps it is this story that is a bridge over the void, and as it advances it flings forward news and sensations and emotions to create a ground of upsets both collective and individual in the midst of which a path can be opened while we remain in the dark about many circumstances both historical and geographical. I clear my path through the wealth of details that cover the void I do not want to



* * *



notice and I advance impetuously, while instead the female character freezes on the edge of a step amid the shoving crowd, until I manage to carry her down, almost a dead weight, step by step, to set her feet on the cobbles of the street along the river.

She collects herself; she raises before her a haughty gaze; she resumes walking and does not stop; her stride does not hesitate; she sets off toward Mill Street; I can hardly keep up with her.

The story must also work hard to keep up with us, to report a dialogue constructed on the void, speech by speech. For the story, the bridge is not finished: beneath every word there is nothingness.

"Feeling better?" I ask her.

"It's nothing. I have dizzy spells when I least expect them, even if there is no danger in sight.... Altitude or depth makes no difference.... If I gaze at the sky at night, and I think of the distance of the stars ... Or even in the daytime ... If I were to be down here, for example, with my eyes facing up, my head would swim...." And she points to the clouds that are passing swiftly, driven by the wind. She speaks of her head swimming as of a temptation that somehow attracts her.

I am a bit disappointed that she hasn't said a word of thanks. I remark, "This isn't a good place to lie down and look at the sky, by day or by night. You can take it from me: I know about it."

As between the iron steps of the bridge, in the dialogue, intervals of emptiness open between one speech and the next.

"You know about looking at the sky? Why? Are you an astronomer?"

"No, another kind of observer." And I point out to her on the collar of my uniform the insignia of the artillery. "Days under bombardments, watching the shrapnel fly."

Her gaze passes from the insignia to the epaulets that I



* * *



don't have, then to the not very obvious chevrons of rank sewn on my sleeves. "You come from the front, Lieutenant?"

"Alex Zinnober," I introduce myself. "I don't know if I can be called a lieutenant. In our regiment, ranks have been abolished, but orders change all the time. For the moment, I'm a soldier with two stripes on his sleeves, that's all."

"I'm Irina Piperin, as I was also before the revolution. For the future, I don't know. I used to design fabrics, and as long as there's a shortage of cloth, I'll make designs for the air."

"With the revolution, there are people who change so much they become unrecognizable, and other people who feel they are the same selves as before. It must be a sign that they were prepared in advance for the new times. Is that the case?"

She makes no reply. I add, "Unless it's their total rejection that preserves them from changes. Is that your situation?"

"I... You tell me first: how much do you think you have changed?"

"Not much. I realize I have retained certain points of honor from before: catch a woman about to fall, for example, even if nowadays nobody says thank you."

"We all have moments of weakness, women and men, and it isn't impossible, Lieutenant, that I may have an opportunity to return your kindness of a moment ago." In her voice there is a hint of harshness, or perhaps of pique.

At this point the dialogue—which has concentrated all attention on itself, almost making one forget the visual upheaval of the city—could break off; the usual military vehicles cross the square and the page, separating us, or else the usual lines of women outside the shops or the usual processions of workers carrying signs. Irina is far away now, the hat with the rose is sailing over a sea of



* * *



gray caps, of helmets, kerchiefs; I try to follow her, but she doesn't turn around.

Several paragraphs ensue, bristling with names of generals and deputies, concerned with the shelling and retreats from the front, about schisms and unifications in the parties represented in the Council, punctuated by climatic annotations: downpours, frosts, racing clouds, windstorms. All this, in any case, solely as a frame for my moods: a festive abandonment to the wave of events, or of withdrawal into myself as if concentrating myself into an obsessive pattern, as if everything around me served only to disguise me, to hide me, like the sandbag defenses that are being raised more or less on all sides (the city seems to be preparing to fight street by street), the fences that every night billposters of various factions cover with manifestos that are immediately soaked by the rain and become illegible because of the absorbent paper and the cheap ink.

Every time I pass the building that houses the Heavy Industry Commission I say to myself: Now I'll go and call on my friend Valerian. I have been repeating this to myself since the day of my arrival. Valerian is the closest friend I have here in the city. But, every time, I postpone the visit because of some important assignments I have to take care of. And yet you would say I apparently enjoy a freedom unusual for a soldier in service: the nature of my duties is not quite clear; I come and go among the offices of various headquarters; I am rarely seen in the barracks, as if I were not on strength in any unit; nor, for that matter, am I obviously glued to a desk.

Unlike Valerian, who doesn't budge from his desk. The day I go up to look for him I find him there, but he doesn't seem intent on government duties: he is cleaning a revolver. He chuckles into his ill-shaven beard, seeing me. He says: "So, you've come to fall into this trap, too, along with us."



* * *



"Or to trap others," I answer.

"The traps are one inside the other, and they all snap shut at the same time." He seems to want to warn me of something.

The building where the commission offices are installed was the residence of a war profiteer and his family; it was confiscated by the revolution. Some of the furnishings are gaudy and luxurious and have remained to mingle with the grim bureaucratic equipment; Valerian's office is cluttered with boudoir chinoiserie: vases with dragons, lacquered coffers, a silk screen.

"Who do you want to trap in this pagoda? An Oriental queen?"

From behind the screen a woman comes: short hair, a gray silk dress, milk-colored stockings.

"Male dreams don't change, not even with the revolution," she says, and in the aggressive sarcasm in her voice I recognize my passing acquaintance from the Iron Bridge.

"You see? There are ears that listen to our every word ..." Valerian says to me, laughing.

"The revolution does not put dreams on trial, Irina Piperin," I answer her.

"Nor does it save us from nightmares," she retorts.

Valerian intervenes: "I didn't know you two were acquainted."

"We met in a dream," I say. "We were falling off a bridge."

And she says: "No. Each has a different dream."

"And there are even some who happen to wake up in a safe place like this, guaranteed against any vertigo ..." I insist.

"Vertigo is everywhere." And she takes the revolver that Valerian has finished reassembling, breaks it, puts her eye to the barrel as if to see whether it's properly cleaned, spins the chamber, slips a bullet into one of the holes,



* * *



raises the hammer, holds the weapon aimed at her eye, again spinning the chamber. "It seems a bottomless pit. You feel the summons of the void, the temptation to fall, to join the darkness that is beckoning...."

"Hey, weapons aren't things to joke around with," I say, and hold out a hand, but she trains the revolver on me.

"Why not?" she says. "Women can't, but you men can? The real revolution will be when women carry arms."

"And men are disarmed? Does that seem fair to you, comrade? Women armed to do what?"

"To take your place. We on top, and you underneath. So you men can feel a bit of what it's like to be a woman. Go on, move, go over there, go over beside your friend," she commands, still aiming the weapon at me.

"Irina has a certain constancy in her ideas," Valerian warns me. "It's no good contradicting her."

"And now?" I ask, and I look at Valerian, expecting him to intervene and put an end to the joke.

Valerian's eyes are on Irina, but his gaze is lost, as if he is in a trance, as if in absolute surrender, as if he expects pleasure only from submission to her whim.

An outrider from Military High Command enters with a bundle of files. When it is opened, the door hides Irina, who disappears. Valerian, as if nothing had happened, deals with his tasks.

"Tell me ..." I ask him, as soon as we can speak. "Do those jokes seem right to you?"

"Irina doesn't joke," he says, without raising his eyes from the papers. "You'll see."

Now, from that moment, time changes shape, the night expands, the nights become a single night in the city crossed by our now inseparable trio, a single night that reaches its climax in Irina's room, in a scene that is meant to be private but is also one of exhibition and challenge, the ceremony of that secret and sacrificial cult of which Irina is at once priestess and divinity, profaner and victim.



* * *



The story resumes its interrupted progress; now the space that it must cover is overloaded, thick, it leaves no crevice open to the horror of the void among the geometric-patterned draperies, the pillows, the atmosphere impregnated with the odor of our naked bodies, Irina's breasts barely protruding from her skinny chest, the dark areolas that would be more in proportion on a more swollen bosom, the narrow, pointed pubes in the form of an isosceles triangle (the word "isosceles," once I had associated it with Irina's pubes, is charged for me with such sensuality that I cannot say it without making my teeth chatter). Near the center of the scene, the lines tend to twist, to become sinuous like the smoke from the brazier where she is burning the poor surviving aromas from an Armenian spice shop whose borrowed fame as an opium den had sparked the looting by the mob avenging morality, to twist—the lines again—like the invisible rope that binds us, the three of us, and the more we writhe to free ourselves the more our knots tighten, dig into our flesh. In the center of this tangle, in the heart of the drama of this secret association of ours, there is the secret I bear within me and cannot reveal to anyone, least of all to Irina and Valerian, the secret mission that has been entrusted to me: to discover the identity of the spy who has infiltrated the Revolutionary Committee and who is about to deliver the city into the hands of the Whites.

In the midst of the revolutions which that windy winter swept the streets of the capital like gusts of the north wind, a secret revolution was being born, which would transform the powers of bodies and sexes: this Irina believed, and she had succeeded in imposing this belief not only on Valerian, who, a district judge's son with a degree in political economy, follower of Indian sages and Swiss theosophists, was the preordained adept of every doctrine within the confines of the conceivable, but also on me, who came from such a harder school, on me, who knew



* * *



that in a short time the future was going to be decided between the Revolutionary Tribunal and the Whites' Court-Martial, and that two firing squads, one on one side and one on the other, were waiting with their weapons at order arms.

I tried to escape, insinuating myself with crawling movements toward the center of the spirals, where the lines slithered like serpents following the writhing of Irina's limbs, supple and restless, in a slow dance where it is not the rhythm that counts but the knotting and loosening of serpentine lines. There are two serpents whose heads Irina grasps with her hands, and they react to her grasp, intensifying their own aptitude for rectilinear penetration, while she was insisting, on the contrary, that the maximum of controlled power should correspond to a reptile pliability bending to overtake her in impossible contortions.

Because this was the first article of faith of the cult Irina had established: that we abandon the standard idea of verticality, of the straight line, the surviving ill-concealed male pride that had remained with us even when we accepted our condition as slaves of a woman who allowed no jealousies between us, no supremacies of any kind. "Down," Irina said, and her hand pressed the back of Valerian's head, her fingers sinking into the young economist's woolly hair, a straw-red color, not allowing him to raise his face to the level of her womb, "farther down!" And meanwhile she looked at me with diamond eyes and wanted me to watch, wanted our two gazes also to proceed along serpentine and continuous paths. I felt her gaze which did not abandon me for an instant, and meanwhile I felt on me another gaze which followed me at every moment and in every place, the gaze of an invisible power that was expecting of me only one thing: death, no matter whether it was the death I was to bring to others, or my own.



* * *



I was awaiting the moment when the thong of Irina's gaze would be loosened. There: she half-closes her eyes; there: I am slithering in the shadow, behind the pillows, the sofas, the brazier; there: where Valerian has left his clothes folded in perfect order, as is his habit, I crawl in the shadow of Irina's lowered eyelids, I search Valerian's pockets, his wallet, I hide in the darkness of her clenched eyelids, in the darkness of the cry that comes from her throat, I find the paper, folded double, with my name written by a steel nib, under the formula of the death sentence for treason, signed and countersigned below the regimental rubber stamps.



* * *



[5]

At this point they throw open the discussion. Events, characters, settings, impressions are thrust aside, to make room for the general concepts.

"The polymorphic-perverse sexuality ..."

"The laws of a market economy ..."

"The homologies of the signifying structures ..."

"Deviation and institutions ..."

"Castration..."

Only you have remained suspended there, you and Ludmilla, while nobody else thinks of continuing the reading.

You move closer to Lotaria, reach out one hand toward the loose sheets in front of her, and ask, "May I?"; you try to gain possession of the novel. But it is not a book: it is one signature that has been torn out. Where is the rest?

"Excuse me, I was looking for the other pages, the rest," you say.

"The rest?... Oh, there's enough material here to discuss for a month. Aren't you satisfied?"

"I didn't mean to discuss; I wanted to read..." you say.

"Listen, there are so many study groups, and the Erulo-Altaic Department had only one copy, so we've divided it up; the division caused some argument, the book came to pieces, but I really believe I captured the best part."

Seated at a café table, you sum up the situation, you and Ludmilla. "To recapitulate: Without fear of wind or vertigo is not Leaning from the steep slope, which, in turn, is not Outside the town of Malbork, which is quite different from If on a winter's night a traveler. The only thing we can do is go to the source of all this confusion."

"Yes. It's the publishing house that subjected us to



* * *



these frustrations, so it's the publishing house that owes us satisfaction. We must go and ask them."

"If Ahti and Viljandi are the same person?"

"First of all, ask about If on a winter's night a traveler, make them give us a complete copy, and also a complete copy of Outside the town of Malbork. I mean copies of the novels we began to read, thinking they had that title; and then, if their real titles and authors are different, the publishers must tell us and explain the mystery behind these pages that move from one volume to another."

"And in this way," you add, "perhaps we will find a trail that will lead us to Leaning from the steep slope, unfinished or completed, whichever it may be ..."

"I must admit," Ludmilla says, "that when I heard the rest had been found, I allowed my hopes to rise."

"...and also to Without fear of wind or vertigo, which is the one I'd be impatient to go on with now..."

"Yes, me, too, though I have to say it isn't my ideal novel...."

Here we go again. The minute you think you're on the right track, you promptly find yourself blocked by a switch: in your reading, in the search for the lost book, in the identification of Ludmilla's tastes.

"The novel I would most like to read at this moment," Ludmilla explains, "should have as its driving force only the desire to narrate, to pile stories upon stories, without trying to impose a philosophy of life on you, simply allowing you to observe its own growth, like a tree, an entangling, as if of branches and leaves..."

On this point you are in immediate agreement with her; putting behind you pages lacerated by intellectual analyses, you dream of rediscovering a condition of natural reading, innocent, primitive....

"We must find again the thread that has been lost," you say. "Let's go to the publishers' right now."

And she says, 'There's no need for both of us to confront them. You go and then report."



* * *



You're hurt. This hunt excites you because you're pursuing it with her, because the two of you can experience it together and discuss it as you are experiencing it. Now, just when you thought you had reached an accord with her, an intimacy, not so much because now you also call each other tu, but because you feel like a pair of accomplices in an enterprise that perhaps nobody else can understand.

"Why don't you want to come?"

"On principle."

"What do you mean?"

"There's a boundary line: on one side are those who make books, on the other those who read them. I want to remain one of those who read them, so I take care always to remain on my side of the line. Otherwise, the unsullied pleasure of reading ends, or at least is transformed into something else, which is not what I want. This boundary line is tentative, it tends to get erased: the world of those who deal with books professionally is more and more crowded and tends to become one with the world of readers. Of course, readers are also growing more numerous, but it would seem that those who use books to produce other books are increasing more than those who just like to read books and nothing else. I know that if I cross that boundary, even as an exception, by chance, I risk being mixed up in this advancing tide; that's why I refuse to set foot inside a publishing house, even for a few minutes."

"What about me, then?" you reply.

"I don't know about you. Decide for yourself. Everybody reacts in a different way."

There's no making this woman change her mind. You will carry out the expedition by yourself, and you and she will meet here again, in this café, at six.

"You've come about your manuscript? It's with the reader; no, I'm getting that wrong, it's been read, very interesting, of course, now I remember! Remarkable sense



* * *



of language, heartfelt denunciation, didn't you receive our letter? We're very sorry to have to tell you, in the letter it's all explained, we sent it some time ago, the mail is so slow these days, you'll receive it of course, our list is overloaded, unfavorable economic situation. Ah, you see? You've received it. And what else did it say? Thanking you for having allowed us to read it, we will return it promptly. Ah, you've come to collect the manuscript? No, we haven't found it, do just be patient a bit longer, it'll turn up, nothing is ever lost here, only today we found a manuscript we'd been looking for these past ten years, oh, not another ten years, we'll find yours sooner, at least let's hope so, we have so many manuscripts, piles this high, if you like we'll show them to you, of course you want your own, not somebody else's, that's obvious, I mean we preserve so many manuscripts we don't care a fig about, we'd hardly throw away yours which means so much to us, no, not to publish it, it means so much for us to give it back to you."

The speaker is a little man, shrunken and bent, who seems to shrink and bend more and more every time anyone calls him, tugs at his sleeve, presents a problem to him, empties a pile of proofs into his arms. "Mr. Cave-dagna!" "Look, Mr. Cavedagna!" "We'll ask Mr. Cave-dagna!" And every time, he concentrates on the query of the latest interlocutor, his eyes staring, his chin quivering, his neck twisting in the effort to keep pending and in plain view all the other unresolved queries, with the mournful patience of overnervous people and the ultrasonic nervousness of overpatient people.

When you came into the main office of the publishing firm and explained to the doormen the problem of the wrongly bound books you would like to exchange, first they told you to go to Administration; then, when you added that it wasn't only the exchange of books that interested you but also an explanation of what had hap-



* * *



pened, they sent you to Production; and when you made it clear that what mattered to you was the continuation of the story of the interrupted novels, "Then you'd better speak with our Mr. Cavedagna," they concluded. "Have a seat in the waiting room; some others are already in there; your turn will come."

And so, making your way among the other visitors, you heard Mr. Cavedagna begin several times the story of the manuscript that couldn't be found, each time addressing different people, yourself included, and each time being interrupted before realizing his mistake, by visitors or by other editors and employees. You realize at once that Mr. Cavedagna is that person indispensable to every firm's staff, on whose shoulders his colleagues tend instinctively to unload all the most complex and tricky jobs. Just as you are about to speak to him, someone arrives bearing a production schedule for the next five years to be brought up to date, or an index of names in which all the page numbers must be changed, or an edition of Dostoyevsky that has to be reset from beginning to end because every time it reads Maria now it should read Mar'ja and every time it says Pyotr it has to be corrected to Pëtr. He listens to everybody, though always tormented by the thought of having broken off the conversation with a previous postulant, and as soon as he can he tries to appease the more impatient, assuring them he hasn't forgotten them, he is keeping their problem in mind. "We much admired the atmosphere of fantasy...." ("What?" says a historian of Trotskyite splinter groups in New Zealand, with a jolt.) "Perhaps you should tone down some of the scatological images...." ("What are you talking about?" protests a specialist in the macroeconomy of the oligopolises. )

Suddenly Mr. Cavedagna disappears. The corridors of the publishing house are full of snares: drama cooperatives from psychiatric hospitals roam through them, groups devoted to group analysis, feminist commandos.



* * *



Mr. Cavedagna, at every step, risks being captured, besieged, swamped.

You have turned up here at a time when those hanging around publishing houses are no longer aspiring poets or novelists, as in the past, would-be poetesses or lady writers; this is the moment (in the history of Western culture ) when self-realization on paper is sought not so much by isolated individuals as by collectives: study seminars, working parties, research teams, as if intellectual labor were too dismaying to be faced alone. The figure of the author has become plural and moves always in a group, because nobody can be delegated to represent anybody: four ex-convicts of whom one is an escapee, three former patients with their male nurse and the male nurse's manuscript. Or else there are pairs, not necessarily but tendentially husband and wife, as if the shared life of a couple had no greater consolation than the production of manuscripts.

Each of these characters has asked to speak with the person in charge of a certain department or the expert in a certain area, but they all end up being shown in to Mr. Cavedagna. Waves of talk from which surface the vocabularies of the most specialized and most exclusive disciplines and schools are poured over this elderly editor, whom at first glance you defined as "a little man, shrunken and bent," not because he is more of a little man, more shrunken, more bent than so many others, or because the words "little man, shrunken and bent" are part of his way of expressing himself, but because he seems to have come from a world where they still—no: he seems to have emerged from a book where you still encounter—you've got it: he seems to have come from a world in which they still read books where you encounter "little men, shrunken and bent."

Without allowing himself to be distracted, he lets the arrays of problems flow over his bald pate, he shakes his



* * *



head, and he tries to confine the question to its more practical aspects: "But couldn't you, forgive me for asking, include the footnotes in the body of the text, and perhaps condense the text a bit, and even—the decision is yours— turn it into a footnote?"

"I'm a reader, only a reader, not an author," you hasten to declare, like a man rushing to the aid of somebody about to make a misstep.

"Oh, really? Good, good! I'm delighted!" And the glance he gives you really is a look of "friendliness and gratitude. "I'm so pleased. I come across fewer and fewer readers...."

He is overcome by a confidential urge: he lets himself be carried away; he forgets his other tasks; he takes you aside. "I've been working for years and years for this publisher ... so many books pass through my hands... but can I say that I read? This isn't what I call reading.... In my village there were few books, but I used to read, yes, in those days I did read.... I keep thinking that when I retire I'll go back to my village and take up reading again, as before. Every now and then I set a book aside, I'll read this when I retire, I tell myself, but then I think that it won't be the same thing any more.... Last night I had a dream, I was in my village, in the chicken coop of our house, I was looking, looking for something in the chicken coop, in the basket where the hens lay their eggs, and what did I find? A book, one of the books I read when I was a boy, a cheap edition, the pages tattered, the black-and-white engravings all colored, by me, with crayons... You know? As a boy, in order to read, I would hide in the chicken coop...."

You start to explain to him the reason for your visit. He understands at once, and doesn't even let you continue: "You, too! The mixed-up signatures, we know all about it, the books that begin and don't continue, the entire recent



* * *



production of the firm is in turmoil, you've no idea. We can't make head or tail of it any more, my dear sir."

In his arms he has a pile of galleys; he sets them down gently, as if the slightest jolt could upset the order of the printed letters. "A publishing house is a fragile organism, dear sir," he says. "If at any point something goes askew, then the disorder spreads, chaos opens beneath our feet. Forgive me, won't you? When I think about it I have an attack of vertigo." And he covers his eyes, as if pursued by the sight of billions of pages, lines, words, whirling in a dust storm.

"Come, come, Mr. Cavedagna, don't take it like this." Now it's your job to console him. "It was just a reader's simple curiosity, my question.... But if there's nothing you can tell me..."

"What I know, I'll tell you gladly," the editor says. "Listen. It all began when a young man turned up in the office, claiming to be a translator from the whatsitsname, from the youknowwhat...."

"Polish?"

"No, no, Polish indeed! A difficult language, one not many people know ..."

"Cimmerian?"

"Not Cimmerian. Farther on. What do you call it? This person passed himself off as an extraordinary polyglot, there was no language he didn't know, even whatchama-callit, Cimbrian, yes, Cimbrian. He brings us a book written in that language, a great big novel, very thick, whatsitsname, the Traveler, no, the Traveler is by the other one, Outside the town ..."

"By Tazio Bazakbal?"

"No, not Bazakbal, this was the Steep slope, by whosit..."

"Ahti?"

"Bravo, the very one. Ukko Ahti."

"But ... I beg your pardon: isn't Ukko Ahti a Cimmerian author?"



* * *



"Well, to be sure, he was Cimmerian before, Ahti was; but you know what happened, during the war, after the war, the boundary adjustments, the Iron Curtain, the fact is that now there is Cimbria where Cimmeria used to be, and Cimmeria has shifted farther on. And so Cimmerian literature was also taken over by the Cimbrians, as part of their war reparations...."

"This is the thesis of Professor Galligani, which Professor Uzzi-Tuzii rejects...."

"Oh, you can imagine the rivalry at the university between departments, two competing chairs, two professors who can't stand the sight of each other, imagine Uzzi-Tuzii admitting that the masterpiece of his language has to be read in the language of his colleague...."

"The fact remains," you insist, "that Leaning from the steep slope is an unfinished novel, or, rather, barely begun.... I saw the original...."

"Leaning... Now, don't get me mixed up, it's a title that sounds similar but isn't the same, it's something with Vertigo, yes, it's the Vertigo of Viljandi."

"Without fear of wind or vertigo? Tell me: has it been translated? Have you published it?"

"Wait. The translator, a certain Ermes Marana, seemed a young man with all the proper credentials: he hands in a sample of the translation, we schedule the title, he is punctual in delivering the pages of the translation, a hundred at a time, he pockets the payments, we begin to pass the translation on to the printer, to have it set, in order to save time.... And then, in correcting the proofs, we notice some misconstructions, some oddities.. .. We send for Marana, we ask him some questions, he becomes confused, contradicts himself.... We press him, we open the original text in front of him and request him to translate a bit orally.... He confesses he doesn't know a single word of Cimbrian!"

"And what about the translation he turned in to you?"

"He had put the proper names in Cimbrian, no, in



* * *



Cimmerian, I can't remember, but the text he had translated was from another novel...."

"What novel?"

"What novel? we ask him. And he says: A Polish novel (there's your Polish!) by Tazio Bazakbal..."

"Outside the town of Malbork..."

"Exactly. But wait a minute. That's what he said, and for the moment we believed him; the book was already on the presses. We stop everything, change the title page, the cover. It was a big setback for us, but in any case, with one title or another, by one author or the other, the novel was there, translated, set, printed.... We calculated that all this to-ing and fro-ing with the print shop, the bindery, the replacement of all the first signatures with the wrong title page—in other words, it created a confusion that spread to all the new books we had in stock, whole runs had to be scrapped, volumes already distributed had to be recalled from the booksellers...."

"There's one thing I don't understand: what novel are you talking about now? The one with the station or the one with the boy leaving the farm? Or—?"

"Bear with me. What I've told you is only the beginning. Because by now, as is only natural, we no longer trust this gentleman, and we want to see the picture clearly, compare the translation with the original. And what do we discover next? It wasn't the Bazakbal, either, it was a novel translated from the French, a book by an almost unknown Belgian author, Bertrand Vandervelde, entitled... Wait: I'll show you."

Cavedagna goes out, and when he reappears he hands you a little bundle of photocopies. "Here, it's called Looks down in the gathering shadow. We have here the French text of the first pages. You can see with your own eyes, judge for yourself what a swindle! Ermes Marana translated this trashy novel, word by word, and passed it off to us as Cimmerian, Cimbrian, Polish...."



* * *



You leaf through the photocopies and from the first glance you realize that this Regarde en bas dans l'épaisseur des ombres by Bertrand Vandervelde has nothing in common with any of the four novels you have had to give up reading. You would like to inform Cavedagna at once, but he is producing a paper attached to the file, which he insists on showing you: "You want to see what Marana had the nerve to reply when we charged him with this fraud? This is his letter..." And he points out a paragraph for you to read.

"What does the name of an author on the jacket matter? Let us move forward in thought to three thousand years from now. Who knows which books from our period will be saved, and who knows which authors' names will be remembered? Some books will remain famous but will be considered anonymous works, as for us the epic of Gilgamesh; other authors' names will still be well known, but none of their works will survive, as was the case with Socrates; or perhaps all the surviving books will be attributed to a single, mysterious author, like Homer."

"Did you ever hear such reasoning?" Cavedagna exclaims; then he adds, "And he might even be right, that's the rub..."

He shakes his head, as if seized by a private thought; he chuckles slightly, and sighs slightly. This thought of his, you, Reader, can perhaps read on his brow. For many years Cavedagna has followed books as they are made, bit by bit, he sees books be born and die every day, and yet the true books for him remain others, those of the time when for him they were like messages from other worlds. And so it is with authors: he deals with them every day, he knows their fixations, indecisions, susceptibilities, ego-centricities, and yet the true authors remain those who for him were only a name on a jacket, a word that was part of the title, authors who had the same reality as their characters, as the places mentioned in the books, who existed



* * *



and didn't exist at the same time, like those characters and those countries. The author was an invisible point from which the books came, a void traveled by ghosts, an underground tunnel that put other worlds in communication with the chicken coop of his boyhood....

Somebody calls him. He hesitates a moment, undecided whether to take back the photocopies or to leave them with you. "Mind you, this is an important document; it can't leave these offices, it's the corpus delicti, there could be a trial for plagiarism. If you want to examine it, sit down here at this desk, and remember to give it back to me, even if I forget it, it would be a disaster if it were lost...."

You could tell him it didn't matter, this isn't the novel you were looking for, but partly because you rather like its opening, and partly because Mr. Cavedagna, more and more worried, has been swept away by the whirlwind of his publishing activities, there is nothing for you to do but start reading Looks down in the gathering shadow.



* * *



Looks down in the gathering shadow

It was all very well for me to pull up the mouth of the plastic bag: it barely reached Jojo's neck, and his head stuck out. Another way would be to put him into the sack head first, but that still didn't solve the problem, because then his feet emerged. The solution would have been to make him bend his knees, but much as I tried to help him with some kicks, his legs, which had become stiff, resisted, and in the end when I did succeed, legs and sack bent together: he was still harder to move and the head stuck out worse than before.

"When will I manage really to get rid of you, Jojo?" I said to him, and every time I turned him around I found that silly face of his in front of me, the heart-throb mustache, the hair soldered with brilliantine, the knot of his tie sticking out of the sack as if from a sweater, I mean a sweater dating from the years when he still followed the fashion. Maybe Jojo had arrived at the fashion of those years a bit late, when it was no longer the fashion anywhere, but having envied as a young man those characters dressed like that, with their hair like that, from their



* * *



brilliantine to their black patent-leather shoes with velvet saddles, he had identified that look with good fortune, and once he had made it he was too taken up with his own success to look around and notice that the men he wanted to resemble had a completely different appearance.

The brilliantine held well; even when I pressed his skull, to push him down into the sack, his crown of hair remained spherical and split only into compact strips that stood up in an arc. The knot of his tie had gone a bit crooked; instinctively I started to straighten it, as if a corpse with a crooked tie might attract more attention than a corpse that was neat.

"You need another sack to stick over his head," Bernadette said, and once again I had to admit that girl's intelligence was superior to what you would expect from one of her background.

The trouble was that we couldn't manage to find another large-size plastic bag. There was only one, for a kitchen garbage can, a small orange sack that could serve very well to conceal his head, but not to conceal the fact that this was a human body contained in one sack, with the head contained in a smaller one.

But the way things were, we couldn't stay in that basement any longer, we had to get rid of Jojo before daylight, we had already been carrying him around for a couple of hours as if he were alive, a third passenger in my convertible, and we had already attracted the attention of too many people. For instance, those two cops on their bicycles who came over quietly and stopped to look at us as we were about to tip him into the river (the Pont de Bercy had seemed deserted a moment before), and immediately Bernadette and I start slapping him on the back, Jojo slumped there, his head and hands swaying over the rail, and I cry, "Go ahead, vomit it all up, mon vieux, it'll clear your head!" And, both of us supporting him, his arms around our necks, we carry him to the car.



* * *



At that moment the gas that accumulates in the belly of corpses is expelled noisily; the two cops burst out laughing. I thought that Jojo dead had quite a different character from the living Jojo, with his finicky manners; and, alive, he wouldn't have been so generous, coming to the aid of two friends who were risking the guillotine for his murder.

Then we started looking for the plastic bag and the can of gas, and now all we had to find was the place. It seems impossible, in a big city like Paris, but you can waste hours looking for the right place to burn up a corpse. "Isn't there a forest at Fontainebleau?" I say, starting the motor, to Bernadette, who has sat down beside me again. "Tell me the way; you know the road." And I thought that perhaps when the sun had tinged the sky gray we would be coming back into the city in the line of trucks carrying vegetables, and in a clearing among the hornbeams nothing would be left of Jojo but a charred and fetid residue, and my past as well. And as well, I say, this might be the time when I can convince myself that all my pasts are burned and forgotten, as if they had never existed.

How many times had I realized that my past was beginning to weigh on me, that there were too many people who thought I was in their debt, materially and morally— for example, at Macao, the parents of the girls of the "Jade Garden" (I mention them because there's nothing worse than Chinese relations when it comes to not being able to get rid of them) and yet when I hired the girls I made a straightforward deal, with them and their families, and I paid cash, so as not to see them constantly turning up there, the skinny mothers and fathers in white socks, with a bamboo basket smelling of fish, with that lost expression as if they had come from the country, whereas they all lived in the port quarter. As I was saying, how many times, when the past weighed too heavily on me, had I been seized by that hope of a clean break: to



* * *



change jobs, wife, city, continent—one continent after the other, until I had made the whole circle—habits, friends, business, customers. It was a mistake, but when I realized that, it was too late.

Because in this way all I did was to accumulate past after past behind me, multiplying the pasts, and if one life was too dense and ramified and embroiled for me to bear it always with me, imagine so many lives, each with its own past and the pasts of the other lives that continue to become entangled one with the others. It was all very well for me to say each time: What a relief, I'll turn the mileage back to zero, I'll erase the blackboard. The morning after the day I arrived in a new country, this zero had already become a number with so many ciphers that the meter was too small, it filled the blackboard from one side to the other, people, places, likes, dislikes, missteps. Like that night when we were looking for the right place to burn up Jojo, our headlights searching among the tree trunks and the rocks, and Bernadette pointing to the dashboard: "Look. Don't tell me we're out of gas." She was right. With all the things on my mind, I had forgotten to fill the tank, and now we risked ending up miles from nowhere with a broken-down car, at a time when all the service stations were closed. Fortunately, we hadn't set fire to Jojo yet: if we had come to a halt only a short distance from the pyre, we couldn't have run off on foot, leaving behind a car that could be identified as mine. In other words, all we could do was pour into our tank the can of gas meant to soak Jojo's blue suit, his mono-grammed silk shirt, and then beat it back to the city as fast as possible, trying to dream up another plan for getting rid of him.

It was all very well for me to say that every time I had landed in a jam I had always extricated myself, from every lucky situation as well as from every disaster. The past is like a tapeworm, constantly growing, which I carry



* * *



curled up inside me, and it never loses its rings no matter how hard I try to empty my guts in every WC, English-style or Turkish, or in the slop jars of prisons or the bedpans of hospitals or the latrines of camps, or simply in the bushes, taking a good look first to make sure no snake will pop out, like that time in Venezuela. You can't change your past any more than you can change your name; in spite of all the passports I've had, with names I can't even remember, everybody has always called me Ruedi the Swiss. Wherever I went and however I introduced myself, there has always been somebody who knew who I was and what I had done, even though my appearance has changed a lot with the passing years, especially since my head has become hairless and yellow as a grapefruit, which happened during the typhoid epidemic aboard the Stjarna, because, considering the cargo we were carrying, we couldn't approach shore or even radio for help.

Anyway, the conclusion to which all stories come is that the life a person has led is one and one alone, uniform and compact as a shrunken blanket where you can't distinguish the fibers of the weave. And so if by chance I happen to dwell on some ordinary detail of an ordinary day, the visit of a Singhalese who wants to sell me a litter of newborn crocodiles in a zinc tub, I can be sure that even in this tiny, insignificant episode there is implicit everything I have experienced, all the past, the multiple pasts I have tried in vain to leave behind me, the lives that in the end are soldered into an overall life, my life, which continues even in this place from which I have decided I must not move any more, this little house with a courtyard garden in the Parisian banlieu where I have set up my tropical-fish aquarium, a quiet business, which forces me more than any other would to lead a stable life, because you can't neglect the fish, not even for one day, and as for women, at my age you have earned the right not to feel like getting involved in new troubles.



* * *



Bernadette is a different story. With her I could say I had proceeded without a single error: as soon as I had learned Jojo was back in Paris and was on my trail, I didn't delay a moment before setting out on his trail, and so I discovered Bernadette, and I was able to get her on my side, and we worked out the job together, without his suspecting a thing. At the right moment I drew the curtain aside and the first thing I saw of him—after all the years in which we had lost sight of each other—was the piston movement of his big hairy behind between her white knees; then the neatly combed hair on the back of his head on the pillow, beside her face, a bit wan, moving ninety degrees to leave me free to strike. Everything happened in the quickest and cleanest way, giving him no time to turn and recognize me, to know who had arrived to spoil his party, maybe not even to become aware of crossing the border between the hell of the living and the hell of the dead.

It was better like that, for me to look him in the face only as a dead man. "The game's over, you old bastard," I couldn't help saying to him, in an almost affectionate voice, while Bernadette was dressing him neatly, including the patent-leather-and-velvet shoes, because we had to carry him outside pretending he was so drunk he couldn't stand on his own feet. And I happened to think of our first meeting all those years ago in Chicago, in the back of old Mrs. Mikonikos's shop, full of busts of Socrates, when I realized that I had invested the insurance money from the faked fire in his rusty slot machines and that he and the old paralytic nymphomaniac had me in their power. The day before, looking from the dunes at the frozen lake, I had tasted such freedom as I had never felt for years, and in the course of twenty-four hours the space around me had closed again, and everything was being decided in a block of stinking houses between the Greek neighborhood and the Polish neighborhood. My



* * *



life had known turning points of this sort by the dozen, in one direction or the other, but after that I never stopped trying to get even with him, and since then the list of my losses had only grown longer. Even now that the smell of corpse began to rise through his cheap cologne, I realized that the game with him wasn't yet over, that Jojo dead could ruin me yet again as he had ruined me so often when alive.

I'm producing too many stories at once because what I want is for you to feel, around the story, a saturation of other stories that I could tell and maybe will tell or who knows may already have told on some other occasion, a space full of stories that perhaps is simply my lifetime, where you can move in all directions, as in space, always finding stories that cannot be told until other stories are told first, and so, setting out from any moment or place, you encounter always the same density of material to be told. In fact, looking in perspective at everything I am leaving out of the main narration, I see something like a forest that extends in all directions and is so thick that it doesn't allow light to pass: a material, in other words, much richer than what I have chosen to put in the foreground this time, so it is not impossible that the person who follows my story may feel himself a bit cheated, seeing that the stream is dispersed into so many trickles, and that of the essential events only the last echoes and reverberations arrive at him; but it is not impossible that this is the very effect I aimed at when I started narrating, or let's say it's a trick of the narrative art that I am trying to employ, a rule of discretion that consists in maintaining my position slightly below the narrative possibilities at my disposal.

Which, if you look closer, is the sign of real wealth, solid and vast, in the sense that if, we'll assume, I had only one story to tell, I would make a huge fuss over this story and would end up botching it in my rage to show it in its



* * *



true light, but, actually having in reserve a virtually unlimited supply of narratable material, I am in a position to handle it with detachment and without haste, even allowing a certain irritation to be perceptible and granting myself the luxury of expatiating on secondary episodes and insignificant details.

Every time the little gate creaks—I'm in the shed with the tanks at the end of the garden—I wonder from which of my pasts the person is arriving, seeking me out even here: maybe it is only the past of yesterday and of this same suburb, the squat Arab garbage collector who in October begins his rounds for tips, house by house, with a Happy New Year card, because he says that his colleagues keep all the December tips for themselves and he never gets a penny; but it could also be the more distant pasts pursuing old Ruedi, finding the little gate in the Impasse: smugglers from Valais, mercenaries from Katanga, croupiers from the Varadero casino and the days of Fulgencio Batista.

Bernadette had no part in any of my pasts; she knew nothing of the old business between Jojo and me that had forced me to eliminate him like that, maybe she believed I had done it for her, for what she had told me of the life he has forced her into. And for the money, naturally, which was no pittance, even if I couldn't yet say that I felt it in my pocket. It was our common interest that kept us together: Bernadette is a girl who catches on right away; in that mess, either we managed to get out of it together or we were both done for. But certainly Bernadette had something else in the back of her mind: a girl like her, if she's going to get by, has to be able to count on somebody who knows his way around; if she had got me to rid her of Jojo, it was in order to put me in his place. There had been all too many stories of this sort in my past, and they had all been total losses for me; this was why I had retired from business and didn't want to go back into it.



* * *



And so, when we were about to begin our nighttime wanderings, with him all snappily dressed and sitting properly in the back of the convertible, and her sitting beside me up front, forced to stretch one arm back to hold him steady, as I was about to start the engine, suddenly she flings her left leg over the gearshift and puts it on top of my right leg. "Bernadette!" I cry. "What are you doing?" And she explains to me that when I burst into the room I interrupted her at a moment when she can't be interrupted; never mind whether with one of us or the other, she had to pick up at that same point and keep on till the end. Meanwhile with one hand she was holding the dead man and with the other she was unbuttoning me, all three of us crammed into that tiny car, in a public parking lot of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine. Wriggling her legs in contortions—harmonious ones, I must say—she sat astride my knees and almost smothered me in her bosom as in a landslide. Jojo meanwhile was falling on top of us, but she was careful to push him aside, her face only inches from the face of the dead man, who looked at her with the whites of his widened eyes. As for me, caught by surprise like this, with my physical reactions following their own course, obviously preferring to obey her than to follow my own terrified spirit, without even having to move, since she thought of everything—well, I realized then that what we were doing was a ceremony to which she attached a special meaning, there before the dead man's eyes, and I felt the soft, very tenacious grip closing and I couldn't escape her.

"You've got it wrong, girl," I would have liked to say to her. 'That dead man died because of another story, not yours, a story that hasn't ended yet." I would have liked to tell her that there was another woman between me and Jojo, in that story not yet ended, and if I keep skipping from one story to another it's because I keep circling around that story and escaping, as if it were the first day



* * *



of my escape, the minute I learned that she and Jojo had joined forces to ruin me. It's a story that sooner or later I'll also end up telling, but in the midst of all the others, not giving more importance to one than to another, not putting any special passion into it beyond the pleasure of narrating and remembering, because even remembering evil can be a pleasure when the evil is mixed I won't say with good, but with variety, the volatile, the changeable, in other words with what I can also call good, which is the pleasure of seeing things from a distance and narrating them as what is past.

"This will also be fun to tell when we're out of it," I said to Bernadette, getting into that elevator with Jojo in the plastic sack. Our plan was to drop him off the terrace of the top floor into a very narrow courtyard, where the next morning whoever found him would think of suicide or else a misstep during a robbery. And what if someone got into the elevator at one of the other floors and saw us with the sack? I would say the elevator had been called upstairs just as we were taking out the garbage. In fact it would soon be dawn.

"You can foresee all possible situations," Bernadette says. And how could I have managed otherwise, I would like to say to her, having to watch out for Jojo's mob for so many years, when he had his men in all the key cities of the big traffic? But I would have to explain to her the whole background of Jojo and that other woman, who never stopped demanding that I get him back the stuff that they said they lost through my fault, demanding I put around my neck again that chain of blackmail that still forces me to spend the night looking for a resting place for an old friend in a plastic sack.

With the Singhalese, too, I thought there was something behind the visit. "I don't handle crocodiles, jeune homme," I said to him. "Try the zoo, I deal in other articles, I supply the shops downtown, private aquariums in people's apart-



* * *



ments, exotic fish, at the most turtles. They ask for iguanas now and then, but I don't stock them. Too delicate."

The boy—he must have been eighteen—stayed put; his mustache and eyelashes seemed like black feathers on his orange cheeks.

"Who sent you to me? Satisfy my curiosity," I asked him, because when Southeast Asia is involved, I am always distrustful, and I have my own good reasons.

"Mademoiselle Sibylle," he says.

"What does my daughter have to do with crocodiles?" I cry. It's true, she's been living on her own for some time now, but whenever I hear news of her I become uneasy. I don't know why, the thought of children has always inspired me with a kind of remorse.

And so I learn that in a boîte on Place Clichy, Sibylle does a number with alligators; at first the news made such a nasty impression on me that I didn't ask for further details. I knew she was working in nightclubs, but the idea that she exhibits herself in public with a crocodile seems to me the last thing a father could wish as the future of his only daughter; at least for a man like me, who had a Protestant upbringing.

"What's it called, this great nightclub?" I say, livid. "I'd like to go and have a look for myself."

He hands me a little cardboard advertisement, and I immediately feel cold sweat down my back, because that name, the Nouvelle Titania, looks familiar to me, all too familiar, even if these are memories from another part of the globe.

"And who runs it?" I ask. "Yes, the manager, the boss!"

"Ah, Madame Tatarescu, you mean...." And he lifts the zinc tub again, to take the litter away.

I was staring at that tangle of green scales, claws, tails, gaping mouths, and it was as if I had been clubbed on the skull, my ears transmitted nothing now but a grim buzz, a roar, the trumpet of the beyond, as soon as I had heard



* * *



the name of that woman from whose destroying influence I had managed to tear Sibylle, covering our traces across two oceans, constructing for the girl and me a calm, silent life. All in vain. Vlada had caught up with her daughter, and through Sibylle she again had me in her power, with the capacity only she possessed for rousing in me the fiercest aversion and the darkest attraction. Already she was sending me a message in which I could recognize her: that roiling of reptiles, to remind me that evil was the only vital element for her, that the world was a pit of crocodiles which I could not escape.

In the same way I looked, leaning from the terrace, down at the bottom of that leprous courtyard. The sky was already brightening, but down there the darkness was still thick, and I could barely make out the irregular stain that Jojo had become after hurtling through the void with the flaps of his jacket spread out like wings and after shattering all his bones with a boom like a firearm's.

The plastic sack had remained in my hand. We could leave it there, but Bernadette was afraid that if they found it, they would be able to reconstruct the way things had gone, so it was best to take it away and get rid of it.

On the ground floor, as we opened the elevator, there were three men with their hands in their pockets.

"Hello, Bernadette."

And she said, "Hello."

I didn't like the idea of her knowing them, especially since the way they dressed, though more up to date than Jojo's, betrayed, to my eyes, a certain family likeness.

"What are you carrying in that sack? Let's have a look," the biggest of the three says.

"See for yourself. It's empty," I say, calmly.

He sticks one hand into it. "What's this, then?" He takes out a black patent-leather shoe with a velvet saddle.



* * *



[6]

The pages of photocopying stop at this point, but for you the only thing that matters now is to continue your reading. Somewhere the complete volume must exist; you look around, seeking it with your gaze, but promptly lose heart; in this office books are considered raw material, spare parts, gears to be dismantled and reassembled. Now you understand Ludmilla's refusal to come with you; you are gripped by the fear of having also passed over to "the other side" and of having lost that privileged relationship with books which is peculiar to the reader: the ability to consider what is written as something finished and definitive, to which there is nothing to be added, from which there is nothing to be removed. But you are consoled by the faith Cavedagna continues to cherish in the possibility of innocent reading, even here.

Now the elderly editor reemerges from the glass partitions. Grab him by the sleeve, tell him you want to read the rest of Looks down in the gathering shadow.

"Ah, heaven only knows where it's got to.... All the papers in the Marana business have vanished. His typescripts, the original texts, Cimbrian, Polish, French. He's vanished, everything's vanished, overnight."

"And you've heard no more from him?"

"No, he wrote.... We've received many letters.... Tales that don't make any sense ... I won't try to tell them to you, because I wouldn't know where to begin. I would have to spend hours reading through the entire correspondence."

"Could I have a look at it?"

Realizing you are determined to see the thing through, Cavedagna agrees to have them bring you the "Marana, Ermes" file from the archives.



* * *



"Do you have some free time? Good. Sit here and read. Then you can tell me what you think. Who knows? Maybe you'll be able to make some sense out of it."

In writing to Cavedagna, Marana always has some practical reason: to justify his delay in the delivery of the translations, to press for payment of the advances, to point out new foreign publications they shouldn't let slip through their fingers. But among these normal subjects of business correspondence appear hints of intrigues, plots, mysteries, and to explain these hints, or to explain why he is unwilling to say more, Marana in the end becomes embroiled in increasingly frenzied and garbled volubility.

The letters are addressed from places scattered over five continents, although they never seem to have been entrusted to the normal post, but, rather, to random messengers who mail them elsewhere, so the stamps on the envelopes do not correspond to the countries of provenance. The chronology is also uncertain: there are letters that refer to previous communications, which, however, prove to have been written later; there are letters that promise further explanations, which instead are found in pages dated a week earlier.

"Cerro Negro," the name—it would seem—of a remote village in South America, appears in the heading of the last letters; but exactly where it is, whether climbing up the Cordillera of the Andes or enshrouded in the forests of the Orinoco, cannot be comprehended from the contradictory glimpses of the landscape that are suggested. The letter you have before you looks like a normal business letter: but how on earth did a Cimmerian-language publishing firm end up down there? And how, if their editions are aimed at the limited market of Cimmerian emigrants in the two Americas, can they publish Cimmerian translations of brand-new books by the most celebrated international authors for which they have the world rights also in the authors' original languages? The fact remains that



* * *



Ermes Marana, who apparently has become their manager, offers Cavedagna an option on the new and eagerly awaited novel In a network of lines that enlace by the famous Irish writer Silas Flannery.

Another letter, again from Cerro Negro, is written, on the contrary, in a tone of inspired evocation: reporting—it seems—a local legend, it tells of an old Indian known as the Father of Stories, a man of immemorial age, blind and illiterate, who uninterruptedly tells stories that take place in countries and in times completely unknown to him. The phenomenon has brought expeditions of anthropologists and parapsychologists; it has been determined that many novels published by famous authors had been recited word for word by the wheezing voice of the Father of Stories several years before their appearance. The old Indian, according to some, is the universal source of narrative material, the primordial magma from which the individual manifestations of each writer develop; according to others, a seer who, thanks to his consumption of hallucinatory mushrooms, manages to establish communication with the inner world of the strongest visionary temperaments and pick up their psychic waves; according to still others he is the reincarnation of Homer, of the storyteller of the Arabian Nights, of the author of the Popol Vuh, as well as of Alexandre Dumas and James Joyce; but there are those who reply that Homer has no need of metempsychosis, since he never died and has continued through the millennia living and composing, the author, besides the couple of poems usually attributed to him, also of many of the most famous narratives known to man. Ermes Marana, putting a tape recorder to the mouth of the cave where the old man hides ...

But from a previous letter, this time headed New York, the origin of the unpublished works offered by Marana would seem to be something quite different:



* * *



"The headquarters of the OEPHLW, as you see from the letterhead, is in the old Wall Street district. Ever since the business world deserted these austere buildings, their ecclesiastical appearance, inspired by English banks, has become quite sinister. I press a buzzer. 'It's Ermes. I'm bringing you the beginning of the Flannery novel.' They have been waiting for me for some time, since I wired from Switzerland that I had managed to persuade that elderly author of thrillers to entrust to me the beginning of the novel he was unable to continue, assuring him that our computers would be capable of completing it easily, programmed as they are to develop all the elements of a text with perfect fidelity to the stylistic and conceptual models of the author."

The delivery of those pages to New York was not easy, if we are to believe what Marana writes from a capital in black Africa, giving his adventurous streak free rein:

"We went on, immersed, the plane in a curly cream of clouds, I in the reading of the unpublished work of Silas Flannery, In a network of lines that enlace, precious manuscript lusted after by the international publishing world, which I had daringly taken from the author. And suddenly the mouth of a sawed-off Tommy gun is placed on the bridge of my eyeglasses.

"A commando of armed young people has taken over the plane; the reek of perspiration is unpleasant; I soon realize that their chief objective is the capture of my manuscript. These kids belong to the OAP, surely; but the latest bunch of militants are totally unknown to me; grave, hairy faces and a superior attitude are not characteristics that allow me to distinguish which of the movement's two wings they belong to.

"... I won't tell you at length about the puzzled peregrinations of our aircraft, whose route kept bouncing from one control tower to another, inasmuch as no airport



* * *



was prepared to receive us. Finally President Butamatari, a dictator with humanistic leanings, allowed the exhausted jet to land on the bumpy runway of his airport, which bordered on the brousse, and he assumed the role of mediator between the extremist commando and the terrified chancelleries of the great powers. For us hostages the days stretch out limp and frayed under a zinc lean-to in the dusty desert. Bluish vultures peck at the ground, pulling out earthworms."

It becomes clear, from the way he addresses them as soon as he is face to face with them, that there is a bond between Marana and the OAP pirates:

"'Go home, babies, and tell your boss next time to send more bright-eyed scouts, if he wants to bring his bibliography up to date.' They look at me with that adenoidal, sleepy expression of agents caught off guard. This sect consecrated to the worship and the unearthing of secret books has ended up in the hands of kids who have only a vague idea of their mission. 'Who are you?' they ask me. The moment they hear my name they stiffen. New to the organization, they couldn't have known me personally, and all they knew about me was the slander circulated after my expulsion: double or triple or quadruple agent, in the service of God knows who and what. Nobody knows that the Organization of Apocryphal Power, which I founded, had a meaning only as long as my control kept it from falling under the sway of unreliable gurus. 'You took us for those Wing of Light characters, didn't you?' they say to me. 'For your information, we are the Wing of Shadow, and we won't fall into your traps!' This was what I wanted to know. I merely shrugged my shoulders and smiled. Wing of Shadow or Wing of Light, for both sides I'm the traitor to be eliminated, but here they can do nothing to me any more, since President Butamatari, who has guaranteed them the right of asylum, has taken me under his protection...."



* * *



But why should the OAP hijackers want to get possession of that manuscript? You glance through the papers, seeking an explanation, but you find mostly the bragging of Marana, who gives himself credit for diplomatically arranging the agreement by which Butamatari, having disarmed the commando and got hold of the Flannery manuscript, assures its restitution to the author, asking in exchange that the author commit himself to writing a dynastic novel that will justify the leader's imperial coronation and his aims of annexing the bordering territories.

"I was the one who proposed the formula of the agreement and conducted the negotiations. Once I introduced myself as the representative of the 'Mercury and the Muses' agency, specializing in the advertising and exploitation of literary and philosophical works, the situation took its proper course. Having gained the African dictator's trust, having regained that of the Celtic writer (by purloining his manuscript, I have saved it from the capture plots devised by various secret organizations), I then found it easy to persuade the parties to accept a contract advantageous for both...."

An earlier letter, headed from Liechtenstein, permits a reconstruction of the preliminary relations between Flannery and Marana: "You must not believe the rumors in circulation, according to which this Alpine principality houses only the administrative and fiscal headquarters of the limited company that holds the copyright and signs the contracts of the fertile, best-selling author, whose personal whereabouts are unknown and whose actual existence is in doubt.... I must say that my first encounters, with secretaries who shunted me to attorneys, who shunted me to agents, seemed to confirm your information.... The company that exploits this elderly author's endless verbal production of thrills, crimes, and embraces is structured like an efficient private bank. But the atmo-



* * *



sphere reigning there was one of uneasiness and anxiety, as if on the eve of a crash....

"It didn't take me long to discover the reasons: for several months Flannery has been suffering a crisis. He can't write a line; the numerous novels he has begun and for which he has been paid advances by publishers all over the world, involving banks and financing on an international level, these novels in which the brands of liquor to be drunk by the characters, the tourist spots to be visited, the haute-couture creations, furnishings, gadgets, have already been determined by contract through specialized advertising agencies, all remain unfinished, at the mercy of this spiritual crisis, unexplained and unforeseen. A team of ghost writers, experts in imitating the master's style in all its nuances and mannerisms, is ready and waiting to step in and plug the gaps, polish and complete the half-written texts so that no reader could distinguish the parts written by one hand from those by another.... (It seems that their contribution has already played a considerable role in our man's most recent production. ) But now Flannery is telling everybody to wait; he postpones deadlines, announces changes of plan, promises to get back to work as soon as possible, rejects offers of help. According to the more pessimistic rumors, he has started writing a diary, a notebook of reflections, in which nothing ever happens, only moods and the description of the landscape he contemplates for hours from his balcony, through a spyglass...."

In a more euphoric vein the message that, some days later, Marana sends from Switzerland goes: "Make a note of this: where all fail, Ermes Marana succeeds! I have succeeded in speaking with Flannery in person. He was on the terrace of his chalet, watering the potted zinnias. He is a trim, calm old man, pleasant-mannered, as long as he isn't seized by one of his nervous fits.... I could give you a great deal of news about him, valuable for your



* * *



publishing activities, and I will do so the moment I receive some token of your interest, via telex to the bank where I have an account whose number I will now give you... ."

The reasons that Marana was impelled to visit the old novelist are not clear from the correspondence: to some extent it seems that he introduced himself as representative of the OEPHLW of New York (Organization for the Electronic Production of Homogenized Literary Works), offering him technical assistance to finish his novel ("Flannery turned pale, trembled, clutched the manuscript to his bosom. 'No, not that,' he said, 'I would never allow it'"); and partly he seems to have gone there to defend the interests of a Belgian writer who had been shamelessly plagiarized by Flannery, Bertrand Vandervelde.... But when Marana wrote Cavedagna asking to be put in contact with the writer-recluse, the original idea was apparently to propose, as background for the climactic episodes of his next novel, In a network of lines that enlace, an island in the Indian Ocean "that stands out with its ocher-colored beaches against the cobalt deep." The proposition was made in the name of a Milanese real-estate investment firm, with a view toward developing the island, creating a village of bungalows purchasable on the installment plan and by correspondence.

Marana's duties in this firm seem to be connected with "public relations for the development of Developing Countries, with special reference to revolutionary movements, before and after their coming to power, with the aim of procuring and guaranteeing construction permits under the various changes of regime." In this guise, his first mission was carried out in a sultanate of the Persian Gulf where he was to negotiate the subcontract for the construction of a skyscraper. A fortuitous occasion, connected with his work as a translator, had opened to him



* * *



doors normally closed to any European.... "The latest wife of the Sultan comes from our country, a woman of sensitive and restless temperament who suffers from the isolation in which she is confined by the geographical position, the local customs, and by court etiquette, though she is sustained by her insatiable passion for reading...." Forced to abandon the novel Looks down in the gathering shadow because of a production defect in her copy, the young Sultana wrote to the translator, protesting. Marana rushed to Arabia. "An old woman, veiled and bleary, motioned me to follow her. In a roofed garden, among the bergamots and the lyrebirds and the jets of fountains, she came toward me, cloaked in indigo, a mask on her face, green silk dotted with white gold, a strand of aquamarines on her brow...."

You would like to know more about this Sultana; your eyes nervously scour the pages of thin airmail paper as if you expected to see her appear at any moment.... But it seems that Marana, too, in filling page after page, is moved by the same desire, is pursuing her as she conceals herself.... With each letter the story proves more complicated: writing to Cavedagna from "a sumptuous residence at the edge of the desert," Marana tries to explain his sudden disappearance, telling how the Sultan's emissaries obliged him by force (or persuaded him with an appetizing contract? ) to move down there, to continue his work, exactly as before.... The Sultan's wife must never remain without books that please her: a clause in the marriage contract is involved, a condition the bride imposed on her august suitor before agreeing to the wedding. . . After a serene honeymoon in which the young sovereign received the latest works of the major Western literatures in the original languages, which she reads fluently, the situation became tricky.... The Sultan fears, apparently with reason, a revolutionary plot. His secret service dis-



* * *



covered that the conspirators receive coded messages hidden in pages printed in our alphabet. He decreed an embargo, in effect ever since, and ordered the confiscation of all Western books in his lands. Also, the supplying of his consort's personal library has been stopped. An innate mistrust—supported, it seems, by specific evidence—leads the Sultan to suspect his wife of conniving with the revolutionaries. But failure to fulfill the famous clause in the marriage contract would bring about a rupture very onerous for the reigning dynasty, as the lady did not hesitate to threaten in the storm of wrath that overwhelmed her when the guards tore from her hands a novel she had barely begun—the one by Bertrand Vandervelde, to be precise.

It was then that the secret service of the sultanate, learning that Ermes Marana was translating that novel into the lady's native language, persuaded him, with convincing arguments of diverse nature, to move to Arabia. The Sultana receives regularly each evening the stipulated quantity of fictional prose, no longer in the original editions, but in typescript fresh from the translator's hands. If a coded message were hidden in the succession of words or letters of the original, it would now be irretrievable....

"The Sultan sent for me to ask me how many pages I still have to translate in order to finish the book. I realized that in his suspicions of political-conjugal infidelity, the moment he most fears is the drop in tension that will follow the end of the novel, when, before beginning another, his wife will again be attacked by impatience with her condition. He knows the conspirators are waiting for a sign from the Sultana to fight the fuse, but she has given orders never to disturb her while she is reading, not even if the palace were about to blow up.... I have my own reasons for fearing that moment, which could mean the loss of my privileges at court...."



* * *



And so Marana proposes to the Sultan a stratagem prompted by the literary tradition of the Orient: he will break off this translation at the moment of greatest suspense and will start translating another novel, inserting it into the first through some rudimentary expedient; for example, a character in the first novel opens a book and starts reading. The second novel will also break off to yield to a third, which will not proceed very far before opening into a fourth, and so on....

Many feelings distress you as you leaf through these letters. The book whose continuation you were already enjoying in anticipation, vicariously through a third party, breaks off again.... Ermes Marana appears to you as a serpent who injects his malice into the paradise of reading.... In the place of the Indian seer who tells all the novels of the world, here is a trap-novel designed by the treacherous translator with beginnings of novels that remain suspended... just as the revolt remains suspended, while the conspirators wait in vain to begin it with their illustrious accomplice, and time weighs motionless on the flat shores of Arabia.... Are you reading or daydreaming? Do the effusions of a graphomane have such power over you? Are you also dreaming of the petroliferous Sultana? Do you envy the lot of the man decanting novels in the seraglios of Arabia? Would you like to be in his place, to establish that exclusive bond, that communion of inner rhythm, that is achieved through a book's being read at the same time by two people, as you thought possible with Ludmilla? You cannot help giving the faceless lady reader evoked by Marana the features of the Other Reader whom you know; you already see Ludmilla among the mosquito nets, lying on her side, the wave of her hair flowing on the page, in the enervating season of the monsoons, while the palace conspiracy sharpens its blades in silence, and she abandons herself to the flow of reading as if to the sole possible action of life



* * *



in a world where only arid sand remains over strata of oily bitumen and the risk of death for reasons of state and the division of sources of energy....

You look through the correspondence again seeking more recent news of the Sultana.... You see other female figures appear and disappear:

in the island in the Indian Ocean, a woman on a beach "dressed in a pair of big dark glasses and a smearing of walnut oil, placing between her person and the beams of the dog days' sun the brief shield of a popular New York magazine." The issue she is reading publishes in advance the beginning of the new thriller by Silas Flannery. Marana explains to her that magazine publication of the first chapter is the sign that the Irish writer is ready to conclude contracts with firms interested in having brands of whisky appear in the novel, or of champagne, automobile models, tourist spots. "It seems his imagination is stimulated, the more advertising commissions he receives." The woman is disappointed: she is a devoted reader of Silas Flannery. "The novels I prefer," she says, "are those that make you feel uneasy from the very first page...."

from the terrace of the Swiss chalet, Silas Flannery is looking through a spyglass mounted on a tripod at a young woman in a deck chair, intently reading a book on another terrace, two hundred meters below in the valley. "She's there every day," the writer says. "Every time I'm about to sit down at my desk I feel the need to look at her. Who knows what she's reading? I know it isn't a book of mine, and instinctively I suffer at the thought, I feel the jealousy of my books, which would like to be read the way she reads. I never tire of watching her: she seems to live in a sphere suspended in another time and another space. I sit down at the desk, but no story I invent corresponds to what I would like to convey." Marana asks



* * *



him if this is why he is no longer able to work. "Oh, no, I write," he answered; "it's now, only now that I write, since I have been watching her. I do nothing but follow the reading of that woman, seen from here, day by day, hour by hour. I read in her face what she desires to read, and I write it faithfully." "Too faithfully," Marana interrupts him, icily. "As translator and representative of the interests of Bertrand Vandervelde, author of the novel that woman is reading, Looks down in the gathering shadow, I warn you to stop plagiarizing it!" Flannery turns pale; a single concern seems to occupy his mind: "Then, according to you, that reader ... the books she is devouring with such passion are novels by Vandervelde? I can't bear it...."

in the African airport, among the hostages of the hijacking who are waiting sprawled on the ground, fanning themselves or huddled into the blankets distributed by the hostesses at nightfall, when the temperature dropped suddenly, Marana admires the imperturbability of a young woman who is crouching off to one side, her arms grasping her knees, raised beneath her long skirt to act as lectern; her hair, falling on the book, hiding her face; her hand limply turning the pages as if all that mattered were decided there, in the next chapter. "In the degradation that prolonged and promiscuous captivity imposes on the appearance and the behavior of all of us, this woman seems to me protected, isolated, enveloped as if in a distant moon...." It is then that Marana thinks: I must convince the OAP pirates that the book that made setting up their whole risky operation worthwhile is not the one they have confiscated from me, but this one that she is reading....

in New York, in the control room, the reader is soldered to the chair at the wrists, with pressure manometers and a stethoscopic belt, her temples beneath their crown of hair





* * *



held fast by the serpentine wires of the encephalogram that mark the intensity of her concentration and the frequency of stimuli. "All our work depends on the sensitivity of the subject at our disposal for the control tests: and it must, moreover, be a person of strong eyesight and nerves, to be subjected to the uninterrupted reading of novels and variants of novels as they are turned out by the computer. If reading attention reaches certain highs with a certain continuity, the product is viable and can be launched on the market; if attention, on the contrary, relaxes and shifts, the combination is rejected and its elements are broken up and used again in other contexts." The man in the white smock rips off one encephalogram after another, as if they were pages from a calendar. "Worse and worse," he says. "Not one novel being produced holds up. Either the programming has to be revised or the reader is not functioning." I look at the slim face between the blinders and the visor, impassive also because of the earplugs and the chin strap that keeps the jaw from moving. What will her fate be?

You find no answer to this question that Marana lets fall almost with indifference. Holding your breath, you have followed from letter to letter the transformations of the woman reader, as if it were always the same person. But even if they were many persons, to all of them you attribute the appearance of Ludmilla.... Isn't it like her to insist that now one can ask of the novel only to stir a depth of buried anguish, as the final condition of truth which will save it from being an assembly-line product, a destiny it can no longer escape? The image of her naked under the equatorial sun already seems more credible to you than that of her behind the Sultana's veil, but it could still be a single Mata Hari who moves, pensively, through extra-European revolutions to open the way for the bulldozers of a cement firm.... Dispel this image, and receive



* * *



that of the deck chair as it comes toward you through the limpid Alpine air. Here you are ready to drop everything: leave, track down Flannery's hideaway, simply to watch with a spyglass the woman reading or to seek her traces in the diary of the blocked writer.... (Or is what tempts you the idea of being able to resume your own reading of Looks down in the gathering shadow, even under another title and signed by another name?) But now Marana transmits more and more distressing news: there she is hostage of hijackers, then prisoner in a Manhattan slum. How did she end up over there, chained to an instrument of torture? Why is she being forced to undergo as a torment what is her natural condition, reading? And what hidden plan makes the paths of these characters cross constantly: she, Marana, the mysterious sect that steals manuscripts?

As far as you are able to gather from hints scattered through these letters, Apocryphal Power, riven by internecine battles and eluding the control of its founder, Ermes Marana, has broken into two groups: a sect of enlightened followers of the Archangel of Light and a sect of nihilist followers of the Archon of Shadow. The former are convinced that among the false books flooding the world they can track down the few that bear a truth perhaps extrahuman or extraterrestrial. The latter believe that only counterfeiting, mystification, intentional falsehood can represent absolute value in a book, a truth not contaminated by the dominant pseudo truths.

"I thought I was alone in the elevator," Marana writes, again from New York. "Instead a form rises at my side: a youth with hair of arboreal extent had been crouched in a corner, wrapped in clothes of rough canvas. This is not a proper elevator so much as a freight elevator, a cage closed by a folding gate. At every floor a perspective of deserted rooms appears, faded walls with the mark of vanished furniture and uprooted pipes, a desert of moldy



* * *



floors and ceilings. Using his red hands with their long wrists, the young man stops the elevator between two floors.

"'Give me the manuscript. We're the ones you have brought it to, not the others. Even if you were thinking the opposite. This is a true book, even if its author has written so many false ones. So it comes to us.'

"With a judo movement he knocks me to the floor and seizes the manuscript. I realize at this moment that the young fanatic is convinced he is holding the diary of Silas Flannery's spiritual crisis and not the outline of one of his usual thrillers. It's amazing how prompt these secret sects are to pick up any piece of news, whether true or false, that coincides with their expectations. Flannery's crisis had aroused the two rival factions of Apocryphal Power and, with opposing hopes, they had unleashed their informers in the valleys around the novelist's chalet. The Wing of Shadow people, knowing that the great fabricator of assembly-line novels was no longer able to believe in his tricks, had convinced themselves that his next novel would mark the switch from cheap and relative bad faith to essential and absolute bad faith, the masterpiece of falsity as knowledge, and would therefore be the book they had been seeking for such a long time. The Wing of Light followers, on the other hand, thought that from the crisis of such a professional in falsehood only a cataclysm of truth could be born, and this is what they believed the writer's diary of which there was so much talk would be.... At the rumor, circulated by Flannery, that I had stolen an important manuscript from him, each side identified the manuscript with the object of its search, and both set out to find me, the Wing of Shadow causing the hijacking of the plane, the Wing of Light that of the elevator....

'The arboreal young man, having hidden the manuscript in his jacket, slipped out of the elevator, slammed



* * *



the gate in my face, and is now pressing the button to make me disappear downward, after hurling a final threat at me: 'The score with you isn't settled, Agent of Mystification! We still have to liberate our Sister chained to the machine of the Counterfeiters!' I laugh as I slowly sink. There is no machine, kiddo. It's the Father of Stories who dictates our books!'

"He brings the elevator back up. 'Did you say the Father of Stories?' He has turned pale. For years the followers of the sect have been searching for the old blind man, across all the continents, where his legend is handed down in countless local variants.

'"Yes, go tell that to the Archangel of Light! Tell him I've found the Father of Stories! I have him in my hands, and he's working for me! Electronic machine, my foot!' And now I'm the one who presses the down button."

At this point three simultaneous desires are competing in your soul. You would be ready to leave immediately, cross the ocean, explore the continent beneath the Southern Cross until you can find the latest hiding place of Ermes Marana and wrest the truth from him, or at least get from him the continuations of the interrupted novels. At the same time you want to ask Cavedagna if he can immediately let you read In a network of lines that enlace by the pseudo (or genuine?) Flannery, which might also be the same thing as Looks down in the gathering shadow by the genuine (or pseudo?) Vandervelde. And you can't wait to run to the café where you are to meet Ludmilla, to tell her the confused results of your investigation and to convince yourself, by seeing her, that there can be nothing in common between her and the women readers encountered around the world by the mythomane translator.

The last two desires are easily satisfied, and are not mutually exclusive. In the café, waiting for Ludmilla, you begin to read the book sent by Marana.



* * *



In a network of lines that enlace

The first sensation this book should convey is what I feel when I hear the telephone ring; I say "should" because I doubt that written words can give even a partial idea of it: it is not enough to declare that my reaction is one of refusal, of flight from this aggressive and threatening summons, as it is also a feeling of urgency, intolerableness, coercion that impels me to obey the injunction of that sound, rushing to answer even though I am certain that nothing will come of it save suffering and discomfort. Nor do I believe that instead of an attempted description of this state of the spirit, a metaphor would serve better— for example, the piercing sting of an arrow that penetrates a hip's naked flesh. This is not because one cannot employ an imaginary sensation to portray a known sensation— though nobody these days knows the feeling of being struck by an arrow, we all believe we can easily imagine it, the sense of being helpless, without protection in the presence of something that reaches us from alien and unknown spaces, and this also applies very well to the ring of the telephone—but, rather, because the arrow's per-



* * *



emptory inexorability, without modulations, excludes all the intentions, implications, hesitations possible in the voice of someone I do not see, though even before he says anything I can already predict, if not what he will say, at least what my reaction to what he is about to say will be. Ideally, the book would begin by giving the sense of a space occupied by my presence, because all around me there are only inert objects, including the telephone, a space that apparently cannot contain anything but me, isolated in my interior time, and then there is the interruption of the continuity of time, the space is no longer what it was before because it is occupied by the ring, and my presence is no longer what it was before because it is conditioned by the will of this object that is calling. The book would have to begin by conveying all this not merely immediately, but as a diffusion through space and time of these rings that lacerate the continuity of space and time and will.

Perhaps the mistake lies in establishing that at the beginning I and a telephone are in a finite space such as my house would be, whereas what I must communicate is my situation with regard to numerous telephones that ring; these telephones are perhaps not calling me, have no relation to me, but the mere fact that I can be called to a telephone suffices to make it possible or at least conceivable that I may be called by all telephones. For example, when the telephone rings in a house near mine, for a moment I wonder if it is ringing in my house—a suspicion that immediately proves unfounded but which still leaves a wake, since it is possible that the call might really be for me and through a wrong number or crossed wires it has gone to my neighbor, and this is all the more possible since in that house there is nobody to answer and the telephone keeps ringing, and then in the irrational logic that ringing never fails to provoke in me, I think: Perhaps it is indeed for me, perhaps my neighbor is at home but



* * *



does not answer because he knows, perhaps also the person calling knows he is calling a wrong number but does so deliberately to keep me in this state, knowing I cannot answer but know that I should answer.

Or else the anxiety when I have just left the house and I hear a telephone ringing that could be in my house or in another apartment and I rush back, I arrive breathless, having run up the stairs, and the telephone falls silent and I will never know if the call was for me.

Or else also when I am out in the streets, and I hear telephones ring in strange houses; even when I am in strange cities, in cities where my presence is unknown to anyone, even then, hearing a ring, my first thought every time for a fraction of a second is that the telephone is calling me, and in the following fraction of a second there is the relief of knowing myself excluded for the moment from every call, unattainable, safe, but this relief also lasts a mere fraction of a second, because immediately afterward I think that it is not only that strange telephone that is ringing; many kilometers away, hundreds, thousands of kilometers, there is also the telephone in my house, which certainly at that same moment is ringing repeatedly in the deserted rooms, and again I am torn between the necessity and the impossibility of answering.

Every morning before my classes begin I do an hour of jogging; that is, I put on my Olympic sweatsuit and I go out to run, because I feel the need to move, because the doctors have ordered it to combat the excess weight that oppresses me, and also to relieve my nerves a little. During the day in this place, if you do not go to the campus, to the library, to audit colleagues' courses, or to the university coffee shop, you do not know where to go; therefore the only thing is to start running this way or that on the hill, among the maples and the willows, as many students do and also many of my colleagues. We cross on the rustling paths of leaves and sometimes we say "Hi!" to



* * *



each other, sometimes nothing, because we have to save our breath. This, too, is an advantage running has over other sports: everybody is on his own and is not required to answer to others.

The hill is entirely built up, and as I run I pass two-story wooden houses with yards, all different and all similar, and every so often I hear a telephone ring. This makes me nervous; instinctively I slow down; I prick up my ears to hear whether somebody is answering and I become impatient when the ringing continues. Continuing my run, I pass another house in which a telephone is ringing, and I think: There is a telephone chasing me, there is somebody looking up all the numbers on Chestnut Lane in the directory, and he is calling one house after the other to see if he can overtake me.

Sometimes the houses are all silent and deserted, squirrels run up the tree trunks, magpies swoop down to peck at the feed set out for them in wooden bowls. As I run, I feel a vague sensation of alarm, and even before I can pick up the sound with my ear, my mind records the possibility of the ring, almost summons it up, sucks it from its own absence, and at that moment from a house comes, first muffled then gradually more distinct, the trill of the bell, whose vibrations perhaps for some time had already been caught by an antenna inside me before my hearing perceived them, and there I go rushing in an absurd frenzy, I am the prisoner of a circle in whose center is the telephone ringing inside that house, I run without moving away, I hover without shortening my stride.

"If nobody has answered by now, it means nobody is home.... But why do they keep calling, then? What are they hoping? Does a deaf man perhaps live there, and do they hope that by insisting they will make themselves heard? Perhaps a paralytic lives there, and you have to allow a great deal of time so that he can crawl to the phone.... Perhaps a suicide lives there, and as long as



* * *



you keep calling him, some hope remains of preventing his extreme act...." I think perhaps I should try to make myself useful, lend a hand, help the deaf man, the paralytic, the suicide.... And at the same time I think—in the absurd logic at work inside me—that in doing so, I could make sure the call is not by chance for me....

Still running, I push open the gate, enter the yard, circle the house, explore the ground behind it, dash behind the garage, to the tool shed, the doghouse. Everything seems deserted, empty. Through an open window in the rear a room can be seen, in disorder, the telephone on the table continuing to ring. The shutter slams; the window frame is caught in the tattered curtain.

I have circled the house three times; I continue to perform the movements of jogging, raising elbows and heels, breathing with the rhythm of my run so that it is clear my intrusion is not that of a thief; if they caught me at this moment I would have a hard time explaining that I came in because I heard the telephone ring. A dog barks; not here—it is the dog of another house that cannot be seen— but for a moment the signal "barking dog" is stronger in me than the "ringing telephone," and this is enough to open a passage in the circle that was holding me prisoner there; now I resume running among the trees along the street, leaving behind me the increasingly muffled ringing.

I run until there are no more houses. In a field I stop to catch my breath. I do some knee bends, some push-ups, I massage the muscles of my legs so they will not get cold. I look at the time. I am late, I must go back if I do not want to keep my students waiting. All I need is for the rumor to spread that I go running through the woods when I should be teaching.... I fling myself onto the return road, paying no attention to anything; I will not even recognize that house, I will pass it without noticing. For that matter, the house is exactly like the others in every respect, and the only way it could stand out would be if the telephone were to ring again, which is impossible....



* * *



The more I turn these thoughts over in my head, as I run downhill, the more I seem to hear that ring again; it grows more and more clear and distinct, there, I am again in sight of the house and the telephone is still ringing. I enter the garden, I go around behind the house, I run to the window. I have only to reach out to pick up the receiver. Breathless, I say, "He's not here...." and from the receiver a voice—a bit vexed, but only a bit, for what is most striking about this voice is its coldness, its calm— says: "Now, you listen to me. Marjorie is here, she'll be waking in a little while, but she's tied up and can't get away. Write down this address carefully: one-fifteen Hillside Drive. If you come to get her, OK; otherwise, there's a can of kerosene in the basement and a charge of plastic attached to a timer. In half an hour this house will go up in flames...."

"But I'm not—" I begin to answer.

They have already hung up.

Now what do I do? Of course I could call the police, the fire department, on this same telephone, but how can I explain, how can I justify the fact that I, in other words how can I who have nothing to do with it have anything to do with it? I start running again, I circle the house once more, then I resume my way.

I am sorry for this Marjorie, but if she has got herself into such a jam she must be mixed up in God knows what things, and if I stepped forward to save her, nobody would believe that I do not know her, there would be a great scandal, I am a professor at another university invited here as visiting professor, the prestige of both universities would suffer....

To be sure, when a life is in the balance these considerations should take a back seat.... I slow down. I could enter any one of these houses, ask them if they will let me call the police, say first of all quite clearly that I do not know this Marjorie, I do not know any Marjorie....



* * *



To tell the truth, here at the university there is a student named Marjorie, Marjorie Stubbs: I noticed her immediately among the girls attending my classes. She is a girl who you might say appealed to me a lot, too bad that the time I invited her to my house to lend her some books an embarrassing situation may have been created. It was a mistake to invite her: this was during my first days of teaching, they did not yet know the sort I am here, she could misunderstand my intentions, that misunderstanding in fact took place, an unpleasant misunderstanding, even now very hard to clarify because she has that ironic way of looking at me, and I am unable to address a word to her without stammering, the other girls also look at me with an ironic smile....

Yes, I would not want this uneasiness now reawakened in me by the name Marjorie to keep me from intervening to help another Marjorie, whose life is in danger.... Unless it is the same Marjorie... Unless that telephone call was aimed personally at me ... A very powerful band of gangsters is keeping an eye on me, they know that every morning I go jogging along that road, maybe they have a lookout on the hill with a telescope to follow my steps, when I approach that deserted house they call on the telephone, it is me they are calling, because they know the unfortunate impression I made on Marjorie that day at my house and they are blackmailing me....

Almost without realizing it, I find myself at the entrance to the campus, still running, in jogging garb and running shoes, I did not stop by my house to change and pick up my books, now what do I do? I continue running across the campus, I meet some girls drifting over the lawn in little groups, they are my students already on their way to my class, they look at me with that ironic smile I cannot bear.

Still making running movements, I stop Lorna Clifford and I ask her, "Is Stubbs here?"



* * *



The Clifford girl blinks. "Marjorie? She hasn't shown up for two days... Why?"

I have already run off. I leave the campus. I take Grosvenor Avenue, then Cedar Street, then Maple Road. I am completely out of breath, I am running only because I cannot feel the ground beneath my feet, or my lungs in my chest. Here is Hillside Drive. Eleven, fifteen, twenty-seven, fifty-one; thank God the numbers go fast, skipping from one decade to the next. Here is 115. The door is open, I climb the stairs, I enter a room in semidarkness. There is Marjorie, tied on a sofa, gagged. I release her. She vomits. She looks at me with contempt.

"You're a bastard," she says to me.



* * *



[7]

You are seated at a café table, reading the Silas Flannery novel Mr. Cavedagna has lent you and waiting for Ludmilla. Your mind is occupied by two simultaneous concerns: the interior one, with your reading, and the other, with Ludmilla, who is late for your appointment. You concentrate on your reading, trying to shift your concern for her to the book, as if hoping to see her come toward you from the pages. But you're no longer able to read, the novel has stalled on the page before your eyes, as if only Ludmilla's arrival could set the chain of events in motion again.

They page you. It is your name the waiter is repeating among the tables. Get up, you're wanted on the telephone. Is it Ludmilla? It is. "I'll explain later. I can't come now."

"Look: I have the book! No, not that one, none of those: a new one. Listen...." Surely you don't mean to tell her the story of the book over the telephone? Wait and hear her out, hear what she wants to say to you.

"You join me," Ludmilla says. "Yes, come to my house. I'm not at home now, but I won't be long. If you get there first, you can go on in and wait for me. The key is under the mat."

A nonchalant simplicity in her way of living, the key under the mat, trust in her fellow man—also very little to be stolen, of course. You run to the address she has given you. You ring, in vain. As she told you, she isn't home. You find the key. You enter the penumbra of the lowered blinds.

A single girl's house, Ludmilla's house: she lives alone. Is this the first thing you want to verify? Whether there are signs of a man's presence? Or do you prefer to avoid knowing it as long as possible, to live in ignorance, in



* * *



suspicion? Certainly something restrains you from snooping around (you have raised the blinds slightly, but only slightly). Perhaps it is the consideration that if you take advantage of her trust to carry out a detective investigation, then you are unworthy of it. Or perhaps it's because you think you already know by heart what a single girl's little apartment is like; even before looking at it, you could list the inventory of its contents. We live in a uniform civilization, within well-defined cultural models: furnishings, decorative elements, blankets, record player have been chosen among a certain number of given possibilities. What can they reveal to you about what she is really like?

What are you like, Other Reader? It is time for this book in the second person to address itself no longer to a general male you, perhaps brother and double of a hypocrite I, but directly to you who appeared already in the second chapter as the Third Person necessary for the novel to be a novel, for something to happen between that male Second Person and the female Third, for something to take form, develop, or deteriorate according to the phases of human events. Or, rather, to follow the mental models through which we live our human events. Or, rather, to follow the mental models through which we attribute to human events the meanings that allow them to be lived.

This book so far has been careful to leave open to the Reader who is reading the possibility of identifying himself with the Reader who is read: this is why he was not given a name, which would automatically have made him the equivalent of a Third Person, of a character (whereas to you, as Third Person, a name had to be given, Ludmilla), and so he has been kept a pronoun, in the abstract condition of pronouns, suitable for any attribute and any action. Let us see, Other Reader, if the book can succeed



* * *



in drawing a true portrait of you, beginning with the frame and enclosing you from every side, establishing the outlines of your form.

You appeared for the first time to the Reader in a bookshop; you took shape, detaching yourself from a wall of shelves, as if the quantity of books made the presence of a young lady Reader necessary. Your house, being the place in which you read, can tell us the position books occupy in your life, if they are a defense you set up to keep the outside world at a distance, if they are a dream into which you sink as if into a drug, or bridges you cast toward the outside, toward the world that interests you so much that you want to multiply and extend its dimensions through books. To understand this, our Reader knows that the first step is to visit the kitchen.

The kitchen is the part of the house that can tell the most things about you: whether you cook or not (one would say yes, if not every day, at least fairly regularly), whether only for yourself or also for others (often only for yourself, but with care, as if you were cooking also for others; and sometimes also for others, but nonchalantly, as if you were cooking only for yourself), whether you tend toward the bare minimum or toward gastronomy (your purchases and gadgets suggest elaborate and fanciful recipes, at least in your intentions; you may not necessarily be greedy, but the idea of a couple of fried eggs for supper would probably depress you), whether standing over the stove represents for you a painful necessity or also a pleasure (the tiny kitchen is equipped and arranged in such a way that you can move practically and without too much effort, trying not to linger there too long but also being able to stay there without reluctance). The appliances are in their place, useful animals whose merits must be remembered, though without devoting special worship to them. Among the utensils a certain aesthetic tendency is noticeable (a panoply of half-moon choppers,



* * *



in decreasing sizes, when one would be enough), but in general the decorative elements are also serviceable objects, with few concessions to prettiness. The provisions can tell us something about you: an assortment of herbs, some naturally in regular use, others that seem to be there to complete a collection; the same can be said of the mustards; but it is especially the ropes of garlic hung within reach that suggest a relationship with food not careless or generic. A glance into the refrigerator allows other valuable data to be gathered: in the egg slots only one egg remains; of lemons there is only a half and that half-dried; in other words, in basic supplies a certain neglect is noted. On the other hand, there is chestnut purée, black olives, a little jar of salsify or horseradish: it is clear that when shopping you succumb to the lure of the goods on display and don't bear in mind what is lacking at home.

Observing your kitchen, therefore, can create a picture of you as an extroverted, clearsighted woman, sensual and methodical; you make your practical sense serve your imagination. Could a man fall in love with you, just seeing your kitchen? Who knows? Perhaps the Reader, who was already favorably disposed.

He is continuing his inspection of the house to which you let him have the keys. There are countless things that you accumulate around you: fans, postcards, perfume bottles, necklaces hung on the walls. But on closer examination every object proves special, somehow unexpected. Your relationship with objects is selective, personal; only the things you feel yours become yours: it is a relationship with the physicality of things, not with an intellectual or affective idea that takes the place of seeing them and touching them. And once they are attached to you, marked by your possession, the objects no longer seem to be there by chance, they assume meaning as elements of a discourse, like a memory composed of signals and em-



* * *



blems. Are you possessive? Perhaps there is not yet enough evidence to tell: for the present it can be said that you are possessive toward yourself, that you are attached to the signs in which you identify something of yourself, fearing to be lost with them.

In one corner of the wall there are a number of framed photographs, all hung close together. Photographs of whom? Of you at various ages, and of many other people, men and women, and also very old photographs as if taken from a family album; but together they seem to have the function, not so much of recalling specific people, as of forming a montage of the stratifications of existence. The frames are all different, nineteenth-century Art Nouveau floral forms, frames in silver, copper, enamel, tortoiseshell, leather, carved wood: they may reflect the notion of enhancing those fragments of real life, but they may also be a collection of frames, and the photographs may be there only to occupy them; in fact some frames are occupied by pictures clipped from newspapers, one encloses an illegible page of an old letter, another is empty.

Nothing is hung on the rest of the wall, nor does any furniture stand against it. And the whole house is somewhat similar: bare walls here, crammed ones there, as if resulting from a need to concentrate signs into a kind of dense script, surrounded by the void in which to find repose and refreshment again.

The arrangement of the furniture and the objects on it is never symmetrical, either. The order you seek to attain (the space at your disposal is limited, but you show a certain care in exploiting it, to make it seem more extensive) is not the superimposition of a scheme, but the achievement of a harmony among the things that are there.

In short: are you tidy or untidy? Your house does not answer peremptory questions with a yes or a no. You have



* * *



an idea of order, to be sure, even a demanding one, but in practice no methodical application corresponds to it. Obviously your interest in the home is intermittent; it follows the difficulty of your days, the ups and downs of your moods.

Are you depressive or euphoric? The house, in its wisdom, seems to have taken advantage of your moments of euphoria to prepare itself to shelter you in your moments of depression.

Are you really hospitable, or is the way you allow acquaintances to come into the house a sign of indifference? The Reader is looking for a comfortable place to sit and read without invading those spaces clearly reserved for you; he is forming the idea that a guest can be very comfortable in your house provided he can adjust to your rules.

What else? The potted plants don't seem to have been watered for several days, but perhaps you deliberately chose the kind that don't require much attention. For the rest, in these rooms there is no trace of dogs or cats or birds: you are a woman who tends not to increase responsibilities, and this can be a sign either of egoism or of concentration on other, less extrinsic, concerns, as also a sign that you do not need symbolic substitutes for the natural drives that lead you to be concerned with others, to take part in their stories, in life, in books....

Let's have a look at the books. The first thing noticed, at least on looking at those you have most prominent, is that the function of books for you is immediate reading; they are not instruments of study or reference or components of a library arranged according to some order. Perhaps on occasion you have tried to give a semblance of order to your shelves, but every attempt at classification was rapidly foiled by heterogeneous acquisitions. The chief reason for the juxtaposition of volumes, besides the



* * *



dimensions of the tallest or the shortest, remains chronological, as they arrived here, one after the other; anyway, you can always put your hand on any one, also because they are not very numerous (you must have left other bookshelves in other houses, in other phases of your existence), and perhaps you don't often find yourself hunting for a book you have already read.

In short, you don't seem to be a Reader Who Rereads. You remember very well everything you have read (this is one of the first things you communicated about yourself); perhaps for you each book becomes identified with your reading of it at a given moment, once and for all. And as you preserve them in your memory, so you like to preserve the books as objects, keeping them near you.

Among your books, in this assortment that does not make up a library, a dead or dormant part can still be distinguished, which is the store of volumes put aside, books read and rarely reread, or books you have not and will not read but have still retained (and dusted), and then a living part, which is the books you are reading or plan to read or from which you have not yet detached yourself or books you enjoy handling, seeing around you. Unlike the provisions in the kitchen, here it is the living part, for immediate consumption, that tells most about you. Numerous volumes are scattered, some left open, others with makeshift bookmarks or corners of the pages folded down. Obviously you have the habit of reading several books at the same time, you choose different things to read for the different hours of the day, the various corners of your home, cramped as it is: there are books meant for the bedside table, those that find their place by the armchair, in the kitchen, in the bathroom.

It could be an important feature to be added to your portrait: your mind has interior walls that allow you to partition different times in which to stop or flow, to concentrate alternately on parallel channels. Is this enough to



* * *



say you would like to live several lives simultaneously? Or that you actually do live them? That you separate your life with one person or in one environment from your life with others, elsewhere? That in every experience you take for granted a dissatisfaction that can be redeemed only in the sum of all dissatisfactions?

Reader, prick up your ears. This suspicion is being insinuated into your mind, to feed your anxiety as a jealous man who still doesn't recognize himself as such. Ludmilla, herself reader of several books at once, to avoid being caught by the disappointment that any story might cause her, tends to carry forward, at the same time, other stories also....

(Don't believe that the book is losing sight of you, Reader. The you that was shifted to the Other Reader can, at any sentence, be addressed to you again. You are always a possible you. Who would dare sentence you to loss of the you, a catastrophe as terrible as the loss of the I. For a second-person discourse to become a novel, at least two you's are required, distinct and concomitant, which stand out from the crowd of he's, she's, and they's.)

And yet the sight of the books in Ludmilla's house proves reassuring for you. Reading is solitude. To you Ludmilla appears protected by the valves of the open book like an oyster in its shell. The shadow of another man, probable, indeed certain, is if not erased, thrust off to one side. One reads alone, even in another's presence. But what, then, are you looking for here? Would you like to penetrate her shell, insinuating yourself among the pages of the books she is reading? Or does the relationship between one Reader and the Other Reader remain that of two separate shells, which can communicate only through partial confrontations of two exclusive experiences?

You have with you the book you were reading in the



* * *



café, which you are eager to continue, so that you can then hand it on to her, to communicate again with her through the channel dug by others' words, which, as they are uttered by an alien voice, by the voice of that silent nobody made of ink and typographical spacing, can become yours and hers, a language, a code between the two of you, a means to exchange signals and recognize each other.

A key turns in the lock. You fall silent, as if you wanted to surprise her, as if to confirm to yourself and to her that your being here is something natural. But the footstep is not hers. Slowly a man materializes in the hall, you see his shadow through the curtains, a leather windbreaker, a step indicating familiarity with the place but hesitant, as of someone looking for something. You recognize him. It is Irnerio.

You must decide immediately what attitude to take. The dismay at seeing him enter her house as if it were his is stronger than the uneasiness at being here yourself, half hidden. For that matter, you knew perfectly well that Ludmilla's house is open to her friends: the key is under the mat. Ever since you entered you have felt somehow brushed by faceless shadows. Irnerio is at least a known ghost. As you are for him.

"Ah, you're here." He takes note of you first but isn't surprised. This naturalness, which a moment ago you wanted to impose, doesn't cheer you now.

"Ludmilla isn't home," you say, at least to establish your precedence in the information, or actually in the occupation of the territory.

"I know," he says, indifferent. He searches around, handles the books.

"Can I be of help?" you proceed, as though you wanted to provoke him.

"I was looking for a book," Irnerio says.

"I thought you never read," you reply.



* * *



"It's not for reading. It's for making. I make things with books. I make objects. Yes, artworks: statues, pictures, whatever you want to call them. I even had a show. I fix the books with mastic, and they stay as they were. Shut, or open, or else I give them forms, I carve them, I make holes in them. A book is a good material to work with; you can make all sorts of things with it."

"And Ludmilla agrees?"

"She likes my things. She gives me advice. The critics say what I do is important. Now they're putting all my works in a book. They took me to talk with Mr. Cavedagna. A book with photographs of all my works. When this book is printed, I'll use it for another work, lots of works. Then they'll put them in another book, and so on."

"I meant, does Ludmilla agree with your taking away her books...."

"She has lots.... Sometimes she gives me books herself, specifically for me to work on them, books she has no use for. But just any book won't do for me. There are some books that immediately give me the idea of what I can make from them, but others don't. Sometimes I have an idea, but I can't make it until I find the right book." He is disarranging the volumes on a shelf; he weighs one in his hand, observes its spine and its edge, puts it down. "There are books I find likable, and books I can't bear, and I keep coming across them."

And now the Great Wall of books you hoped would keep this barbarian invader far from Ludmilla is revealed as a toy that he takes apart with complete confidence. You laugh bitterly. "Apparently you know Ludmilla's library by heart...."

"Oh, it's always the same stuff, mostly.... But it's nice to see the books all together. I love books...."

"I don't follow you."

"Yes, I like to see books around. That's why it's nice here, at Ludmilla's. Don't you think so?"

The massing of written pages binds the room like the



* * *



thickness of the foliage in a dense wood, no, like stratifications of rock, slabs of slate, slivers of schist; so you try to see through Irnerio's eyes the background against which the living form of Ludmilla must stand out. If you are able to win his trust, Irnerio will reveal to you the secret that intrigues you, the relationship between the Non-reader and the Other Reader, Ludmilla. Quickly, ask him something on this subject, anything. "But you"—this is the only question that comes to your mind—"while she's reading, what do you do?"

"I don't mind watching her read," Irnerio says. "And besides, somebody has to read books, right? At least I can rest easy: I won't have to read them myself."

You have little cause to rejoice, Reader. The secret that is revealed to you, the intimacy between the two of them, consists in the complementary relationship of two vital rhythms. For Irnerio all that counts is the life lived instant by instant; art for him counts as expenditure of vital energy, not as a work that remains, not as that accumulation of life that Ludmilla seeks in books. But he also recognizes, without need of reading, that energy somehow accumulated, and he feels obliged to bring it back into circulation, using Ludmilla's books as the material base for works in which he can invest his own energy, at least for an instant.

"This one suits me," Irnerio says and is about to stick a volume in the pocket of his windbreaker.

"No, leave that one alone. It's the book I'm reading. And besides, it's not mine, I have to return it to Cavedagna. Pick another. Here, take this one.... It's almost the same...."

You have picked up a volume with a red band—latest best seller by silas FLANNERY—and this already explains the resemblance, since all of Flannery's novels are brought out in a specially designed series. But that isn't the only thing: the title that stands out on the dust jacket



* * *



is In a network of lines that... These are two copies of the same book! You weren't expecting this. "Why, this really is odd! I would never have thought that Ludmilla already had it...."

Irnerio holds up his hands. "This isn't Ludmilla's. I don't want to have anything to do with that stuff. I thought there weren't any more of them around."

"Why? Whose is it? What do you mean?"

Irnerio picks up the volume with two fingers, goes toward a little door, opens it, throws the book inside. You have followed him; you stick your head into a dark little storeroom; you see a table with a typewriter, a tape recorder, dictionaries, a voluminous file. From the file you take the sheet that acts as title page, you carry it to the light, you read: "Translation by Ermes Marana."

You are thunderstruck. Reading Marana's letters, you felt you were encountering Ludmilla at every turn.... Because you can't stop thinking of her: this is how you explained it, a proof of your being in love. Now, moving around Ludmilla's house, you come upon traces of Marana. Is it an obsession persecuting you? No, from the very beginning what you felt was a premonition that a relationship existed between them.... Jealousy, which has been a kind of game you played with yourself, now grips you relentlessly. And it isn't only jealousy: it is suspicion, distrust, the feeling that you cannot be sure of anything or anyone.... The pursuit of the interrupted book, which instilled in you a special excitement since you were conducting it together with the Other Reader, turns out to be the same thing as pursuing her, who eludes you in a proliferation of mysteries, deceits, disguises....

"But... what's Marana got to do with it?" you ask. "Does he live here?"

Irnerio shakes his head. "He was here. Now time has passed. He shouldn't come back here again. But by now



* * *



all his stories are so saturated with falsehood that anything said about him is false. He's succeeded in this, at least. The books he brought here look the same as the others on the outside, but I recognize them at once, at a distance. And when I think that there shouldn't be any more here, any more of his papers, except in that storeroom... But every now and then some trace of him pops up again. Sometimes I suspect he puts them here, he comes when nobody's around and keeps making his usual deals, secretly...."

"What deals?"

"I don't know.... Ludmilla says that whatever he touches, if it isn't false already, becomes false. All I know is that if I tried to make my works out of books that were his, they would turn out false: even if they looked the same as the ones I'm always making...."

"But why does Ludmilla keep his things in that storeroom? Is she waiting for him to come back?"

"When he was here, Ludmilla was unhappy.... She didn't read any more.... Then she ran away... She was the first to go off.... Then he went...."

The shadow is going away. You can breathe again. The past is closed. "What if he showed up again?"

"She'd leave once more...."

"For where?"

"Hmm... Switzerland... I don't know...."

"Is there another man in Switzerland?" Instinctively you have thought of the writer with the spyglass.

"You can call him another man, but it's an entirely different sort of story. The old thriller guy ..."

"Silas Flannery?"

"She said that when Marana convinces her that the difference between the true and the false is only a prejudice of ours, she feels the need to see someone who makes books the way a pumpkin vine makes pumpkins—that's how she put it...."



* * *



The door opens suddenly. Ludmilla enters, flings her coat onto a chair, her packages. "Ah, how marvelous! So many friends! Sorry I'm late!"

You are having tea, sitting with her. Irnerio should also be there, but his armchair is empty.

"He was there. Where has he gone?"

"Oh, he must have left. He comes and goes without saying anything."

"People come and go like that, in your house?"

"Why not? How did you get in?"

"I, and all the others!"

"What is this? A jealous scene?"

"What right would I have?"

"Do you think that the time will come when you could have the right? If so, it's best not even to begin."

"Begin what?"

You set the cup on the coffee table. You move from the armchair to the sofa, where she is sitting.

(To begin. You're one who said it, Ludmilla. But how to establish the exact moment in which a story begins? Everything has already begun before, the first line of the first page of every novel refers to something that has already happened outside the book. Or else the real story is the one that begins ten or a hundred pages further on, and everything that precedes it is only a prologue. The lives of individuals of the human race form a constant plot, in which every attempt to isolate one piece of living that has a meaning separate from the rest—for example, the meeting of two people, which will become decisive for both— must bear in mind that each of the two brings with himself a texture of events, environments, other people, and that from the meeting, in turn, other stories will be derived which will break off from their common story. )



* * *



You are in bed together, you two Readers. So the moment has come to address you in the second person plural, a very serious operation, because it is tantamount to considering the two of you a single subject. I'm speaking to you two, a fairly unrecognizable tangle under the rumpled sheet. Maybe afterward you will go your separate ways and the story will again have to shift gears painfully, to alternate between the feminine tu and the masculine; but now, since your bodies are trying to find, skin to skin, the adhesion most generous in sensations, to transmit and receive vibrations and waves, to compenetrate the fullnesses and the voids, since in mental activity you have also agreed on the maximum agreement, you can be addressed with an articulated speech that includes you both in a sole, two-headed person. First of all the field of action, or of existence, must be established for this double entity you form. Where is the reciprocal identification leading? What is the central theme that recurs in your variations and modulations? A tension concentrated on not losing anything of its own potential, on prolonging a state of reactivity, on exploiting the accumulation of the other's desire in order to multiply one's own charge? Or is it the most submissive abandonment, the exploration of the immensity of strokable and reciprocally stroking spaces, the dissolving of one's being in a lake whose surface is infinitely tactile? In both situations you certainly do not exist except in relation to each other, but, to make those situations possible, your respective egos have not so much to erase themselves as to occupy, without reserve, all the void of the mental space, invest in itself at the maximum interest or spend itself to the last penny. In short, what you are doing is very beautiful but grammatically it doesn't change a thing. At the moment when you most appear to be a united voi, a second person plural, you are two tu's, more separate and circumscribed than before.

(This is already true now, when you are still occupied,



* * *



each with the other's presence, in an exclusive fashion. Imagine how it will be in a little while, when ghosts that do not meet will frequent your minds, accompanying the encounters of your bodies tested by habit.)

Ludmilla, now you are being read. Your body is being subjected to a systematic reading, through channels of tactile information, visual, olfactory, and not without some intervention of the taste buds. Hearing also has its role, alert to your gasps and your trills. It is not only the body that is, in you, the object of reading: the body matters insofar as it is part of a complex of elaborate elements, not all visible and not all present, but manifested in visible and present events: the clouding of your eyes, your laughing, the words you speak, your way of gathering and spreading your hair, your initiatives and your reticences, and all the signs that are on the frontier between you and usage and habits and memory and prehistory and fashion, all codes, all the poor alphabets by which one human being believes at certain moments that he is reading another human being.

And you, too, O Reader, are meanwhile an object of reading: the Other Reader now is reviewing your body as if skimming the index, and at some moments she consults it as if gripped by sudden and specific curiosities, then she lingers, questioning it and waiting till a silent answer reaches her, as if every partial inspection interested her only in the light of a wider spatial reconnaissance. Now she dwells on negligible details, perhaps tiny stylistic faults, for example the prominent Adam's apple or your way of burying your head in the hollow of her shoulder, and she exploits them to establish a margin of detachment, critical reserve, or joking intimacy; now instead the accidentally discovered detail is excessively cherished— for example, the shape of your chin or a special nip you take at her shoulder—and from this start she gains impetus, covers (you cover together) pages and pages from



* * *



top to bottom without skipping a comma. Meanwhile, in the satisfaction you receive from her way of reading you, from the textual quotations of your physical objectivity, you begin to harbor a doubt: that she is not reading you, single and whole as you are, but using you, using fragments of you detached from the context to construct for herself a ghostly partner, known to her alone, in the penumbra of her semiconsciousness, and what she is deciphering is this apocryphal visitor, not you.

Lovers' reading of each other's bodies (of that concentrate of mind and body which lovers use to go to bed together) differs from the reading of written pages in that it is not linear. It starts at any point, skips, repeats itself, goes backward, insists, ramifies in simultaneous and divergent messages, converges again, has moments of irritation, turns the page, finds its place, gets lost. A direction can be recognized in it, a route to an end, since it tends toward a climax, and with this end in view it arranges rhythmic phases, metrical scansions, recurrence of motives. But is the climax really the end? Or is the race toward that end opposed by another drive which works in the opposite direction, swimming against the moments, recovering time?

If one wanted to depict the whole thing graphically, every episode, with its climax, would require a three-dimensional model, perhaps four-dimensional, or, rather, no model: every experience is unrepeatable. What makes lovemaking and reading resemble each other most is that within both of them times and spaces open, different from measurable time and space.

Already, in the confused improvisation of the first encounter, the possible future of a cohabitation is read. Today each of you is the object of the other's reading, each reads in the other the unwritten story. Tomorrow, Reader and Other Reader, if you are together, if you lie down in the same bed like a settled couple, each will turn



* * *



on the lamp at the side of the bed and sink into his or her book; two parallel readings will accompany the approach of sleep; first you, then you will turn out the light; returning from separated universes, you will find each other fleetingly in the darkness, where all separations are erased, before divergent dreams draw you again, one to one side, and one to the other. But do not wax ironic on this prospect of conjugal harmony: what happier image of a couple could you set against it?

You speak to Ludmilla of the novel you were reading while you waited for her. "It's a book of the sort you like: it conveys a sense of uneasiness from the very first page...."

An interrogative flash passes in her gaze. A doubt seizes you; perhaps this phrase about uneasiness isn't something you heard her say, you read it somewhere.... Or perhaps Ludmilla has already stopped believing in anguish as a condition of truth.... Perhaps someone has demonstrated to her that anguish, too, is a mechanism, that there is nothing more easily falsified than the unconscious....

"I like books," she says, "where all the mysteries and the anguish pass through a precise and cold mind, without shadows, like the mind of a chessplayer."

"In any case, this is the story of a character who becomes nervous when he hears a telephone ring. One day he's out jogging...."

"Don't tell me any more. Let me read it."

"I didn't get much further myself. I'll bring it to you."

You get out of bed, you go hunt for it in the other room, where the precipitous turn in your relationship with Ludmilla interrupted the normal course of events.

You can't find it.

(You will find it again at an art show: the latest work of the sculptor Irnerio. The page whose corner you had folded down to mark your place is spread out on one of



* * *



the bases of a compact parallelepiped, glued, varnished with a transparent resin. A charred shadow, as of a flame that is released from inside the book, corrugates the surface of the page and opens there a succession of levels like a gnarled rind.)

"I can't find it, but no matter," you say to her. "I noticed you have another copy anyway. In fact, I thought you had already read it...."

Unknown to her, you've gone into the storeroom to find the Flannery book with the red band. "Here it is."

Ludmilla opens it. There's an inscription: "To Ludmilla ... Silas Flannery." "Yes, it's my copy...."

"Ah, you've met Flannery?" you exclaim, as if you knew nothing.

"Yes ... he gave me this book.... But I was sure it had been stolen from me, before I could read it...."

"Stolen by Irnerio?"

"Hmm..."

It's time for you to show your hand.

"It wasn't Irnerio, and you know it. Irnerio, when he saw it, threw it into that dark room, where you keep...."

"Who gave you permission to go rummaging around?"

"Irnerio says that somebody who used to steal your books comes back secretly now to replace them with false books...."

"Irenerio doesn't know anything."

"I do: Cavedagna gave me Marana's letters to read."

"Everything Ermes says is always a trick."

"There's one thing that's true: that man continues to think of you, to see you in all his ravings, he's obsessed by the image of you reading."

"It's what he was never able to bear."

Little by little you will manage to understand something more about the origins of the translator's machina-



* * *



tions: the secret spring that set them in motion was his jealousy of the invisible rival who came constantly between him and Ludmilla, the silent voice that speaks to her through books, this ghost with a thousand faces and faceless, all the more elusive since for Ludmilla authors are never incarnated in individuals of flesh and blood, they exist for her only in published pages, the living and the dead both are there always ready to communicate with her, to amaze her, and Ludmilla is always ready to follow them, in the fickle, carefree relations one can have with incorporeal persons. How is it possible to defeat not the authors but the functions of the author, the idea that behind each book there is someone who guarantees a truth in that world of ghosts and inventions by the mere fact of having invested in it his own truth, of having identified himself with that construction of words? Always, since his taste and talent impelled him in that direction, but more than ever since his relationship with Ludmilla became critical, Ermes Marana dreamed of a literature made entirely of apocrypha, of false attributions, of imitations and counterfeits and pastiches. If this idea had succeeded in imposing itself, if a systematic uncertainty as to the identity of the writer had kept the reader from abandoning himself with trust—trust not so much in what was being told him as in the silent narrating voice—perhaps externally the edifice of literature would not have changed at all, but beneath, in the foundations, where the relationship between reader and text is established, something would have changed forever. Then Ermes Marana would no longer have felt himself abandoned by Ludmilla absorbed in her reading: between the book and her there would always be insinuated the shadow of mystification, and he, identifying himself with every mystification, would have affirmed his presence.

Your eye falls on the beginning of the book. "But this



* * *



isn't the book I was reading.... Same title, same cover, everything the same... But it's another book! One of the two is a fake."

"Of course it's a fake," Ludmilla says, in a low voice.

"Are you saying it's a fake because it passed through Marana's hands? But the book I was reading was also one he had sent to Cavedagna! Can they both be fake?"

"There's only one person who can tell us the truth: the author."

"You can ask him, since you're a friend of his..."

"I was."

"Was it to him that you went, when you ran away from Marana?"

"You know everything!" she says, with an ironic tone that gets on your nerves more than anything else.

Reader, you have made up your mind: you will go to see the writer. Meanwhile, turning your back on Ludmilla, you have begun reading the new book contained inside the same cover.

(Same up to a point. The band latest best seller by silas flannery covers the last word of the title. You would only have to raise it to realize that this novel is not entitled In a network of lines that enlace like the other one; it is called In a network of lines that intersect.)



* * *



In a network of lines that intersect

Speculate, reflect: every thinking activity implies mirrors for me. According to Plotinus, the soul is a mirror that creates material things reflecting the ideas of the higher reason. Maybe this is why I need mirrors to think: I cannot concentrate except in the presence of reflected images, as if my soul needed a model to imitate every time it wanted to employ its speculative capacity. (The adjective here assumes all its meanings: I am at once a man who thinks and a businessman, and a collector of optical instruments as well. )

The moment I put my eye to a kaleidoscope, I feel that my mind, as the heterogeneous fragments of colors and lines assemble to compose regular figures, immediately discovers the procedure to be followed: even if it is only the peremptory and ephemeral revelation of a rigorous construction that comes to pieces at the slightest tap of a fingernail on the side of the tube, to be replaced by another, in which the same elements converge in a dissimilar pattern.

Ever since I realized, when still an adolescent, that the



* * *



contemplation of the enameled gardens jumbled at the bottom of a well of mirrors stirred my aptitude for practical decisions and bold prognostications, I have been collecting kaleidoscopes. The history of this relatively recent object (the kaleidoscope was patented in 1817 by the Scottish physicist Sir David Brewster, author of a Treatise on New Philosophical Instruments, among other works) confined my collection within narrow chronological boundaries. But it was not long before I extended my investigations to a far more illustrious and inspiring antiquarian field: the catoptric instruments of the seventeenth century, little theaters of various design where a figure is seen multiplied by the variation of the angles between the mirrors. My aim is to reconstruct the museum assembled by the Jesuit Athanasius Kircher, author of Ars Magna Lucis et Umbrae (1646) and inventor of the "polydyptic theater," in which about sixty little mirrors lining the inside of a large box transform a bough into a forest, a lead soldier into an army, a booklet into a library.

The businessmen to whom, before meetings, I show the collection glance with superficial curiosity at these bizarre apparatuses. They don't know that I have built my financial empire on the very principle of kaleidoscopes and catoptric instruments, multiplying, as if in a play of mirrors, companies without capital, enlarging credit, making disastrous deficits vanish in the dead corners of illusory perspectives. My secret, the secret of my uninterrupted financial victories in a period that has witnessed so many crises and market crashes and bankruptcies, has always been this: that I never thought directly of money, business, profits, but only of the angles of refraction established among shining surfaces variously inclined.

It is my image that I want to multiply, but not out of narcissism or megalomania, as could all too easily be believed: on the contrary, I want to conceal, in the midst of



* * *



so many illusory ghosts of myself, the true me, who makes them move. For this reason, if I were not afraid of being misunderstood, I would have nothing against reconstructing, in my house, the room completely lined with mirrors according to Kircher's design, in which I would see myself walking on the ceiling, head down, as if I were flying upward from the depths of the floor.

These pages I am writing should also transmit a cold luminosity, as in a mirrored tube, where a finite number of figures are broken up and turned upside down and multiplied. If my figure sets out in all directions and is doubled at every corner, it is to discourage those who want to pursue me. I am a man with many enemies, whom I must constantly elude. When they think they have overtaken me, they will strike only a glass surface on which one of the many reflections of my ubiquitous presence appears and vanishes. I am also a man who pursues his numerous enemies, looming over them and advancing in invincible phalanxes and blocking their path whichever way they turn. In a catoptric world enemies can equally believe that they are surrounding me from every side, but I alone know the arrangement of the mirrors and can put myself out of their reach, while they end up jostling and seizing one another.

I would like my story to express all this through details of financial operations, sudden dramatic shifts at board meetings, telephone calls from brokers in panic, and then also bits of the map of the city, insurance policies, Lorna's mouth when that sentence escaped her, Elfrida's gaze as if pondering some inexorable calculation of hers, one image superimposed on the other, the grid of the map of the city dotted with x's and arrows, motorcycles zooming off and vanishing into the corners of the mirror, motorcycles converging on my Mercedes.

Ever since it became clear to me that my kidnapping would be the exploit most desired not only by the various



* * *



bands of specialist crooks but also by my leading colleagues and rivals in the world of high finance, I have realized that only by multiplying myself, multiplying my person, my presence, my exits from the house, and my returns, in short the opportunities for an ambush, could I make my falling into enemy hands more improbable. So I then ordered five Mercedes sedans exactly like mine, which enter and leave the armored gate of my villa at all hours, escorted by the motorcyclists of my bodyguard, and bearing inside a shadow, bundled up, dressed in black, who could be me or an ordinary stand-in. The companies of which I am president consist of initials with nothing behind them and some headquarters in interchangeable empty rooms; therefore my business meetings can be held at constantly varying addresses which for greater safety I order changed at the last minute each time. More delicate problems stem from my extramarital relationship with a twenty-nine-year-old divorcée, Lorna by name, to whom I devote two and sometimes three weekly sessions of two and three-quarters hours. To protect Lorna the only thing to do was to make it impossible to locate her, and the system to which I have resorted is that of parading a multiplicity of simultaneous amorous encounters, so that it is impossible to understand which are my counterfeit mistresses and which is the real one. Every day both I and my doubles visit, on constantly changing schedules, pied-à-terres scattered all over the city and inhabited by attractive women. This network of false mistresses allows me to conceal my true meetings with Lorna also from my wife, Elfrida, to whom I have presented this extravaganza as a security measure. As for Elfrida, my advice that she give maximum publicity to her movements in order to foil possible criminal plans has not found her prepared to listen to me. Elfrida tends to hide, just as she avoids the mirrors in my collection, as if she feared her image would be shattered by them and



* * *



destroyed: an attitude whose deeper motives escape me and which vexes me not a little.

I would like all the details that I am writing down to concur in creating the impression of a high-precision mechanism, but at the same time of a succession of dazzles that reflect something that remains out of eyeshot. For this reason I must not neglect to insert every so often, at the points where the plot becomes thickest, some quotation from an ancient text: for example, a passage from the De Magia Naturale of Giovanni Battista della Porta, where he says that the magician—that is, the "minister of Nature"—must know "the reasons that the sight is deceived, the images that are produced under water, and in mirrors made in various forms, which at times dispel images from the mirrors, suspended in the air, and he must know how things done at a distance may be clearly seen."

I soon realized that the uncertainty created by the coming and going of identical automobiles would not suffice to avert the danger of criminal traps: I then thought to apply the multiplying power of catoptric mechanisms to the bandits themselves, organizing false ambushes and false kidnappings of some counterfeit of myself, followed by fake releases after the payment of fake ransoms. For these I had to assume the task of setting up a parallel criminal organization, making more and more intimate contacts with the underworld. I thus came to have at my disposal considerable information on various kidnappings in the works, being thus able to act in time, both to protect myself and to exploit the misfortunes of my business adversaries.

At this point the story could mention that among the virtues of mirrors that the ancient books discuss there is also that of revealing distant and hidden things. The Arab geographers of the Middle Ages, in their descriptions of the harbor of Alexandria, recall the column that stood on



* * *



the island of Pharos, surmounted by a steel mirror in which, from an immense distance, the ships proceeding off Cyprus and Constantinople and all the lands of the Romans can be seen. Concentrating the rays, curved mirrors can catch an image of the whole. "God Himself, who cannot be seen either by the body or by the soul," Porphyry writes, "allows himself to be contemplated in a mirror." Together with the centrifugal radiation that projects my image along all the dimensions of space, I would like these pages also to render the opposite movement, through which I receive from the mirrors images that direct sight cannot embrace. From mirror to mirror— this is what I happen to dream of—the totality of things, the whole, the entire universe, divine wisdom could concentrate their luminous rays into a single mirror. Or perhaps the knowledge of everything is buried in the soul, and a system of mirrors that would multiply my image to infinity and reflect its essence in a single image would then reveal to me the soul of the universe, which is hidden in mine.

This and nothing else must have been the power of the magic mirrors that are so often mentioned in treatises of the occult sciences and in anathemas of the Inquisitors: to force the God of Darkness to display himself and to join his image with the one the mirror reflects. I had to extend my collection into another field: dealers and auction houses all over the whole world have been alerted to hold for me the extremely rare examples of those Renaissance mirrors which, through their form or through tradition, can be classified as magic.

It was a difficult game, in which every mistake could cost dearly. My first wrong move was persuading my rivals to join me in founding an insurance company against kidnappings. Sure of my network of information in the underworld, I thought I could retain control over every eventuality. I soon learned that my associates main-



* * *



tained even closer relations with the kidnap bands than I did. For the next kidnapping, the ransom demanded would be all the capital of the insurance company; this would then be divided between the outlaws' organization and their accomplices, the stockholders of the company, all this naturally to the disadvantage of the kidnapped person. As to the identity of this victim, there were no doubts: it was to be me.

The plan to trap me envisaged that between the Honda motorcycles of my escort and the armored car in which I rode, three Yamaha motorcycles would interpose themselves, ridden by three false policemen, who would suddenly slam on their brakes before the curve. According to my counterplan, there would instead be three Suzuki motorcycles which would block my Mercedes five hundred meters before, in a fake kidnapping. When I saw myself blocked by three Kawasaki motorcycles at an intersection before the other two, I realized that my counter-plan had been frustrated by a counter-counterplan whose author I did not know.

As in a kaleidoscope, the hypotheses I would like to record in these lines break up and diverge, just as before my eyes the map of the city became segmented when I dismantled it piece by piece to locate the crossroads where, according to my informers, the trap would be set for me, and to establish the point at which I could get ahead of my enemies so as to upset their plan in my own favor. Everything now seemed assured to me; the magic mirror brought together all the malevolent powers, putting them at my service. I had not taken into consideration a third kidnapping plan arranged by persons unknown. By whom?

To my great surprise, instead of taking me to a secret hideaway, my kidnappers accompany me to my house, lock me in the catoptric room I had reconstructed with such care from the designs of Athanasius Kircher. The



* * *



mirror walls reflect on my image an infinite number of times. Had I been kidnapped by myself? Had one of my images cast into the world taken my place and relegated me to the role of reflected image? Had I summoned the Prince of Darkness and was he appearing to me in my own likeness?

On the mirror floor a woman's body lies, bound. It is Lorna. If she makes the slightest movement, her naked flesh unfolds, repeated on all the mirrors. I fling myself upon her, to free her from her bonds and gag, to embrace her; but she turns on me, infuriated. "You think you have me in your hands? You're mistaken!" And she digs her nails into my face. Is she a prisoner with me? Is she my prisoner? Is she my prison?

Meanwhile a door has opened. Elfrida comes forward. "I knew of the danger threatening you and I managed to save you," she says. "The method may have been a bit brutal, but I had no choice. But now I can't find the door of this cage of mirrors any more. Tell me, quickly, how can I get out?"

One eye and one eyebrow of Elfrida, one leg in its tight boot, the corner of her mouth with its thin lips and too-white teeth, a beringed hand clutching a revolver are repeated, enlarged by the mirrors, and among these lacerated fragments of her figure intrude patches of Lorna's skin, like landscapes of flesh. Already I can distinguish no longer what belongs to one and what belongs to the other, I am lost, I seem to have lost myself, I cannot see my reflection but only theirs. In a fragment of Novalis, an adept who has managed to reach the secret dwelling of Isis lifts the veil of the goddess.... Now it seems to me that everything that surrounds me is a part of me, that I have managed to become the whole, finally....



* * *



[8]

From the diary of Silas Flannery

In a deck chair, on the terrace of a chalet in the valley, there is a young woman reading. Every day, before starting work, I pause a moment to look at her with the spyglass. In this thin, transparent air I feel able to perceive in her unmoving form the signs of that invisible movement that reading is, the flow of gaze and breath, but, even more, the journey of the words through the person, their course or their arrest, their spurts, delays, pauses, the attention concentrating or straying, the returns, that journey that seems uniform and on the contrary is always shifting and uneven.

How many years has it been since I could allow myself some disinterested reading? How many years has it been since I could abandon myself to a book written by another, with no relation to what I must write myself? I turn and see the desk waiting for me, the typewriter with a sheet of paper rolled into it, the chapter to begin. Since I have become a slave laborer of writing, the pleasure of reading has finished for me. What I do has as its aim the spiritual state of this woman in the deck chair framed by the lens of my spyglass, and it is a condition forbidden me.

Every day, before starting work, I look at the woman in the deck chair: I say to myself that the result of the unnatural effort to which I subject myself, writing, must be the respiration of this reader, the operation of reading turned into a natural process, the current that brings the sentences to graze the filter of her attention, to stop for a moment before being absorbed by the circuits of her mind



* * *



and disappearing, transformed into her interior ghosts, into what in her is most personal and incommunicable.

At times I am gripped by an absurd desire: that the sentence I am about to write be the one the woman is reading at that same moment. The idea mesmerizes me so much that I convince myself it is true: I write the sentence hastily, get up, go to the window, train my spyglass to check the effect of my sentence in her gaze, in the curl of her lips, in the cigarette she lights, in the shifts of her body in the deck chair, in her legs, which she crosses or extends.

At times it seems to me that the distance between my writing and her reading is unbridgeable, that whatever I write bears the stamp of artifice and incongruity; if what I am writing were to appear on the polished surface of the page she is reading, it would rasp like a fingernail on a pane, and she would fling the book away with horror.

At times I convince myself that the woman is reading my true book, the one I should have written long ago, but will never succeed in writing, that this book is there, word for word, that I can see it at the end of my spyglass but cannot read what is written in it, cannot know what was written by that me who I have not succeeded and will never succeed in being. It's no use my sitting down again at the desk, straining to guess, to copy that true book of mine she is reading: whatever I may write will be false, a fake, compared to my true book, which no one except her will ever read.

And just as I watch her while she reads, suppose she were to train a spyglass on me while I write? I sit at the desk with my back to the window, and there, behind me, I feel an eye that sucks up the flow of the sentences, leads the story in directions that elude me. Readers are my vampires. I feel a throng of readers looking over my



* * *



shoulder and seizing the words as they are set down on paper. I am unable to write if there is someone watching me: I feel that what I am writing does not belong to me any more. I would like to vanish, to leave behind for that expectation lurking in their eyes the page stuck in the typewriter, or, at most, my fingers striking the keys.

How well I would write if I were not here! If between the white page and the writing of words and stories that take shape and disappear without anyone's ever writing them there were not interposed that uncomfortable partition which is my person! Style, taste, individual philosophy, subjectivity, cultural background, real experience, psychology, talent, tricks of the trade: all the elements that make what I write recognizable as mine seem to me a cage that restricts my possibilities. If I were only a hand, a severed hand that grasps a pen and writes... Who would move this hand? The anonymous throng? The spirit of the times? The collective unconscious? I do not know. It is not in order to be the spokesman for something definable that I would like to erase myself. Only to transmit the writable that waits to be written, the tellable that nobody tells.

Perhaps the woman I observe with the spyglass knows what I should write; or, rather, she does not know it, because she is in fact waiting for me to write what she does not know; but what she knows for certain is her waiting, the void that my words should fill.

At times I think of the subject matter of the book to be written as of something that already exists: thoughts already thought, dialogue already spoken, stories already happened, places and settings seen; the book should be simply the equivalent of the unwritten world translated into writing. At other times, on the contrary, I seem to understand that between the book to be written and things that already exist there can be only a kind of com-



* * *



plementary relationship: the book should be the written counterpart of the unwritten world; its subject should be what does not exist and cannot exist except when written, but whose absence is obscurely felt by that which exists, in its own incompleteness.

I see that one way or another I keep circling around the idea of an interdependence between the unwritten world and the book I should write. This is why writing presents itself to me as an operation of such weight that I remain crushed by it. I put my eye to the spyglass and train it on the reader. Between her eyes and the page a white butterfly flutters. Whatever she may have been reading, now it is certainly the butterfly that has captured her attention. The unwritten world has its climax in that butterfly. The result at which I must aim is something specific, intimate, light.

Looking at the woman in the deck chair, I felt the need to write "from life," that is, to write not her but her reading, to write anything at all, but thinking that it must pass through her reading.

Now, looking at the butterfly that lights on my book, I would like to write "from life," bearing the butterfly in mind. To write, for example, a crime that is horrible but which somehow "resembles" the butterfly, which would be light and fine like the butterfly.

I could also describe the butterfly, but bearing in mind the horrible scene of a crime, so that the butterfly would become something frightful.

Idea for a story. Two writers, living in two chalets on opposite slopes of the valley, observe each other alternately. One of them is accustomed to write in the morning, the other in the afternoon. Mornings and afternoons, the writer who is not writing trains his spyglass on the one who is writing.



* * *



One of the two is a productive writer, the other a tormented writer. The tormented writer watches the productive writer filling pages with uniform lines, the manuscript growing in a pile of neat pages. In a little while the book will be finished: certainly a best seller—the tormented writer thinks with a certain contempt but also with envy. He considers the productive writer no more than a clever craftsman, capable of turning out machine-made novels catering to the taste of the public; but he cannot repress a strong feeling of envy for that man who expresses himself with such methodical self-confidence. It is not only envy, it is also admiration, yes, sincere admiration: in the way that man puts all of his energy into writing there is certainly a generosity, a faith in communication, in giving others what others expect of him, without creating introverted problems for himself. The tormented writer would give anything if he could resemble the productive writer; he would like to take him as a model; his greatest ambition now is to become like him.

The productive writer watches the tormented writer as the latter sits down at his desk, chews his fingernails, scratches himself, tears a page to bits, gets up and goes into the kitchen to fix himself some coffee, then some tea, then camomile, then reads a poem by Hòlderlin (while it is clear that Hòlderlin has absolutely nothing to do with what he is writing), copies a page already written and then crosses it all out line by line, telephones the cleaner's (though it was settled that the blue slacks couldn't be ready before Thursday), then writes some notes that will not be useful now but maybe later, then goes to the encyclopedia and looks up Tasmania (though it is obvious that in what he is writing there is no reference to Tasmania), tears up two pages, puts on a Ravel recording. The productive writer has never liked the works of the tormented writer; reading them, he always feels as if he is on the verge of grasping the decisive point, but then it eludes



* * *



him and he is left with a sensation of uneasiness. But now that he is watching him write, he feels this man is struggling with something obscure, a tangle, a road to be dug leading no one knows where; at times he seems to see the other man walking on a tightrope stretched over the void, and he is overcome with admiration. Not only admiration, also envy; because he feels how limited his own work is, how superficial compared with what the tormented writer is seeking.

On the terrace of a chalet in the bottom of the valley a young woman is sunning herself, reading a book. The two writers observe her with the spyglass. "How enthralled she is! She's holding her breath! How feverishly she turns the pages!" the tormented writer thinks. "Certainly she is reading a novel of great effect, like those of the productive writer!" "How enthralled she is! As if transfigured in meditation, as if she saw a mysterious truth being disclosed!" the productive writer thinks. "Surely she is reading a book rich in hidden meanings, like those of the tormented writer!"

The greatest desire of the tormented writer is to be read the way that young woman is reading. He starts writing a novel as he thinks the productive writer would write it. Meanwhile the greatest desire of the productive writer is to be read the way that young woman is reading; he starts writing a novel as he thinks the tormented writer would write it.

The young woman is approached first by one writer, then by the other. Both tell her they would like her to read the novel they have just finished writing.

The young woman receives the two manuscripts. After a few days she invites the authors to her house, together, to their great surprise. "What kind of joke is this?" She says. "You've given me two copies of the same novel!"

Or else:

The young woman gets the two manuscripts mixed up.



* * *



She returns to the productive writer the tormented writer's novel in the productive writer's manner, and to the tormented writer the productive writer's novel in the tormented writer's manner. Both, seeing themselves counterfeited, have a violent reaction and rediscover their personal vein.

Or else:

A gust of wind shuffles the two manuscripts. The reader tries to reassemble them. A single novel results, stupendous, which the critics are unable to attribute. It is the novel that both the productive writer and the tormented writer have always dreamed of writing.

Or else:

The young woman had always been a passionate reader of the productive writer and has loathed the tormented writer. Reading the productive writer's new novel, she finds it phony and realizes that everything he wrote was phony; on the other hand, recalling the tormented writer's works, she now finds them splendid and can't wait to read his new novel. But she finds something completely different from what she was expecting, and she sends him to the devil, too.

Or else:

The same, replacing "productive" with "tormented" and "tormented" with "productive."

Or else:

The young woman was a passionate admirer, et cetera, et cetera, of the productive writer and loathed the tormented one. Reading the productive writer's new novel she doesn't notice at all that something has changed; she likes it, without being especially enthusiastic. As for the manuscript of the tormented writer, she finds it insipid like all the rest of this author's work. She replies to the two writers with a few polite words. Both are convinced that she can't be a very alert reader and they pay no further attention to her.



* * *



Or else:

The same, replacing, et cetera.

I read in a book that the objectivity of thought can be expressed using the verb "to think" in the impersonal third person: saying not "I think" but "it thinks" as we say "it rains." There is thought in the universe—this is the constant from which we must set out every time.

Will I ever be able to say, "Today it writes," just like "Today it rains," 'Today it is windy"? Only when it will come natural to me to use the verb "write" in the impersonal form will I be able to hope that through me is expressed something less limited than the personality of an individual.

And for the verb "to read"? Will we be able to say, "Today it reads" as we say "Today it rains"? If you think about it, reading is a necessarily individual act, far more than writing. If we assume that writing manages to go beyond the limitations of the author, it will continue to have a meaning only when it is read by a single person and passes through his mental circuits. Only the ability to be read by a given individual proves that what is written shares in the power of writing, a power based on something that goes beyond the individual. The universe will express itself as long as somebody will be able to say, "I read, therefore it writes."

This is the special bliss that I see appear in the reader's face, and which is denied me.

On the wall facing my desk hangs a poster somebody gave me. The dog Snoopy is sitting at a typewriter, and in the cartoon you read the sentence, "It was a dark and stormy night...." Every time I sit down here I read, "It was a dark and stormy night. .." and the impersonality of that incipit seems to open the passage from one world to the other, from the time and space of here and now to the



* * *



time and space of the written word; I feel the thrill of a beginning that can be followed by multiple developments, inexhaustibly; I am convinced there is nothing better than a conventional opening, an attack from which you can expect everything and nothing; and I realize also that this mythomane dog will never succeed in adding to the first seven words another seven or another twelve without breaking the spell. The facility of the entrance into another world is an illusion: you start writing in a rush, anticipating the happiness of a future reading, and the void yawns on the white page.

Ever since I have had this poster before my eyes, I have no longer been able to end a page. I must take this damned Snoopy down from the wall as quickly as possible, but I can't bring myself to do it; that childish figure has become for me an emblem of my condition, a warning, a challenge.

The romantic fascination produced in the pure state by the first sentences of the first chapter of many novels is soon lost in the continuation of the story: it is the promise of a time of reading that extends before us and can comprise all possible developments. I would like to be able to write a book that is only an incipit, that maintains for its whole duration the potentiality of the beginning, the expectation still not focused on an object. But how could such a book be constructed? Would it break off after the first paragraph? Would the preliminaries be prolonged indefinitely? Would it set the beginning of one tale inside another, as in the Arabian Nights?

Today I will begin by copying the first sentences of a famous novel, to see if the charge of energy contained in that start is communicated to my hand, which, once it has received the right push, should run on its own.

On an exceptionally hot evening early in July, a young man came out of the garret in which he lodged in S. Place



* * *



and walked slowly, as though in hesitation, towards K. Bridge.

I will copy out also the second, indispensable paragraph to allow myself to be carried along by the flow of the narration:

He had successfully avoided meeting his landlady on the staircase. His garret was under the roof of a high, five-storied house and it was more like a cupboard than a room. And so on until: He was hopelessly in debt to his landlady, and was afraid of meeting her.

At this point the next sentence attracts me so much that I can't refrain from copying it: This was not because he was cowardly and abject: quite the contrary; but for some time past he had been in an overstrained irritable condition, verging on hypochondria. While I'm about it, I could continue for the whole paragraph, or, indeed, for several pages, until the protagonist introduces himself to the old moneylender. "Raskolnikov, a student, I came here a month ago," the young man made haste to mutter, with a half bow, remembering that he ought to be more polite.

I stop before I succumb to the temptation to copy out all of Crime and Punishment. For an instant I seem to understand the meaning and fascination of a now inconceivable vocation: that of the copyist. The copyist lived simultaneously in two temporal dimensions, that of reading and that of writing; he could write without the anguish of having the void open before his pen; read without the anguish of having his own act become concrete in some material object.

A man called on me, saying he is my translator, to warn me about an outrageous practice damaging to him and to me: the publication of unauthorized translations of my books. He showed me a volume, which I leafed through without getting much out of it: it was written in Japanese, and the only words in the Latin alphabet were my given name and surname on the title page.



* * *



"I can't even figure out which of my books it is," I said, handing the volume back to him. "Unfortunately, I don't know Japanese."

"Even if you knew the language you wouldn't recognize the book," my visitor said to me. "It's a book you have never written."

He explained to me that the great skill of the Japanese in manufacturing perfect facsimiles of Western products has spread to literature. A firm in Osaka has managed to get hold of the formula of Silas Flannery's novels, and it manages to produce absolutely new ones, and first-class novels at that, so it can invade the world market. Retranslated into English (or, rather, translated into English, from which they claim to have been translated), they cannot be distinguished, by any critic, from true Flannerys.

The news of this diabolical swindle has profoundly upset me, but it goes beyond my understandable fury at the economic and moral injury: I feel also a timid attraction for these fakes, for this extension of myself that blossoms from the terrain of another civilization. I imagine an old Japanese in his kimono crossing a curved little bridge: he is my Nipponese self imagining one of my stories, and he succeeds in identifying himself with me through a spiritual itinerary that to me is completely alien. Whereby the false Flannerys turned out by the swindling firm in Osaka would be, of course, vulgar imitations; but at the same time they would contain a refined and arcane wisdom that true Flannerys lack completely.

Naturally, in the presence of a stranger, I had to conceal the ambiguity of my reactions, and I acted as if I were interested only in collecting all the data necessary for bringing a lawsuit.

"I will sue the counterfeiters and anyone who cooperates in the dissemination of the faked books!" I said, looking meaningfully into the translator's eyes, because I suspected this young man was not without a role in the shady business. He said his name is Ermes Marana, a



* * *



name I had never heard. His head is oblong horizontally, like a dirigible, and seems to hide many things behind the convexity of its brow.

I asked him where he lives. 'For the moment, in Japan," he answered me.

He declares himself outraged that anyone would make improper use of my name, and ready to help me put an end to the fraud, but he adds that in the final analysis there is nothing to be shocked about, since, in his view, literature's worth lies in its power of mystification, in mystification it has its truth; therefore a fake, as the mystification of a mystification, is tantamount to a truth squared.

He went on expounding to me his theories, according to which the author of every book is a fictitious character whom the existent author invents to make him the author of his fictions. I feel I can share many of his affirmations, but I was careful not to let him know this. He says he is interested in me chiefly for two reasons: first, because I am an author who can be faked; and second, because he thinks I have the gifts necessary to be a great faker, to create perfect apocrypha. I could therefore incarnate what for him is the ideal author, that is, the author who is dissolved in the cloud of fictions that covers the world with its thick sheath. And since for him artifice is the true substance of everything, the author who devised a perfect system of artifices would succeed in identifying himself with the whole.

I must stop thinking of my conversation yesterday with that Marana. I, too, would like to erase myself and find for each book another I, another voice, another name, to be reborn; but my aim is to capture in the book the illegible world, without center, without ego, without I.

When you think about it, this total writer could be a very humble person, what in America they call a ghost



* * *



writer, a professional of recognized usefulness even if not of great prestige: the anonymous editor who gives book form to what other people have to tell but are unable or lack the time to write; he is the writing hand that gives words to existences too busy existing. Perhaps that was my true vocation and I missed it. I could have multiplied my I's, assumed other people's selves, enacted the selves most different from me and from one another.

But if an individual truth is the only one that a book can contain, I might as well accept it and write my truth. The book of my memory? No, memory is true as long as you do not set it, as long as it is not enclosed in a form. The book of my desires? Those also are true only when their impulse acts independently of my conscious will. The only truth I can write is that of the instant I am living. Perhaps the true book is this diary, in which I try to note down the image of the woman in the deck chair at the various hours of the day, as I observe her in the changing light.

Why not admit that my dissatisfaction reveals an excessive ambition, perhaps a megalomaniac delirium? For the writer who wants to annul himself in order to give voice to what is outside him, two paths open: either write a book that could be the unique book, that exhausts the whole in its pages; or write all books, to pursue the whole through its partial images. The unique book, which contains the whole, could only be the sacred text, the total word revealed. But I do not believe totality can be contained in language; my problem is what remains outside, the unwritten, the unwritable. The only way left me is that of writing all books, writing the books of all possible authors.

If I think I must write one book, all the problems of how this book should be and how it should not be block



* * *



me and keep me from going forward. If, on the contrary, I think that I am writing a whole library, I feel suddenly lightened: I know that whatever I write will be integrated, contradicted, balanced, amplified, buried by the hundreds of volumes that remain for me to write.

The Koran is the holy book about whose compositional process we know most. There were at least two mediations between the whole and the book: Mohammed listened to the word of Allah and dictated, in his turn, to his scribes. Once—the biographers of the Prophet tell us— while dictating to the scribe Abdullah, Mohammed left a sentence half finished. The scribe, instinctively, suggested the conclusion. Absently, the Prophet accepted as the divine word what Abdullah had said. This scandalized the scribe, who abandoned the Prophet and lost his faith.

He was wrong. The organization of the sentence, finally, was a responsibility that lay with him; he was the one who had to deal with the internal coherence of the written language, with grammar and syntax, to channel into it the fluidity of a thought that expands outside all language before it becomes word, and of a word particularly fluid like that of a prophet. The scribe's collaboration was necessary to Allah, once he had decided to express himself in a written text. Mohammed knew this and allowed the scribe the privilege of concluding sentences; but Abdullah was unaware of the powers vested in him. He lost his faith in Allah because he lacked faith in writing, and in himself as an agent of writing.

If an infidel were allowed to excogitate variants on the legends of the Prophet, I would venture this one: Abdullah loses his faith because in writing under dictation he makes a mistake and Mohammed, though he notices it, decides not to correct it, finding the mistaken form preferable. In this case, too, Abdullah would be wrong to be scandalized. It is on the page, not before, that the word,



* * *



even that of the prophetic raptus, becomes definitive, that is to say, becomes writing. It is only through the confining act of writing that the immensity of the nonwritten becomes legible, that is, through the uncertainties of spelling, the occasional lapses, oversights, unchecked leaps of the word and the pen. Otherwise what is outside of us should not insist on communicating through the word, spoken or written: let it send its messages by other paths. There: the white butterfly has crossed the whole valley, and from the reader's book has flown here, to light on the page I am writing.

Strange people circulate in this valley: literary agents awaiting my new novel, for which they have already collected advances from publishers all over the world; advertising agents who want my characters to wear certain articles of clothing and drink certain fruit juices; electronic technicians who insist on finishing my unfinished novels with a computer. I try to go out as little as possible; I avoid the village; if I want to take a walk, I choose the mountain trails.

Today I ran into a party of boys who looked like scouts, excited and yet meticulous, arranging some pieces of canvas on a meadow to form geometric patterns.

"Signals for planes?" I asked.

"For flying saucers," they answered. "We're UFO observers. This is a place of transit, a kind of aerial track that has seen a lot of activity lately. They think it's because a writer is living somewhere around here, and the inhabitants of the other planets want to use him for communication."

"What makes you believe that?" I asked.

"The fact is that for some time this writer has been undergoing a crisis and can't write any more. The newspapers are wondering what the reason can be. According to our calculations, it could be the inhabitants of other



* * *



worlds keeping him inactive, so that he will be drained of terrestrial conditionings and become receptive."

"But why him, particularly?"

"The extraterrestrials can't say things directly. They have to express themselves in an indirect way, a figurative way—for example, through stories that arouse unusual emotions. This writer apparently has a good technique and a certain elasticity of ideas."

"But have you read his books?"

"What he has written so far is of no interest. The book he will write when he emerges from the crisis is the one that could contain the cosmic communications."

'Transmitted to him how?"

"Mentally. He shouldn't even be aware of it. He would believe he is writing as he likes; instead, the message coming from space on waves picked up by his brain would infiltrate what he is writing."

"And would you succeed in decoding the message?"

They did not answer me.

When I think that the interplanetary expectation of these young people will be disappointed, I feel a certain sorrow. After all, I could easily slip into my next book something that might seem to them the revelation of a cosmic truth. For the present I have no idea of what I might invent, but if I start writing, an idea will come to me.

What if it were as they say? If, while I believe I am writing in fun, what I write were really dictated by the extraterrestrials?

It is no use my awaiting a revelation from the sidereal spaces: my novel is not progressing. If I were suddenly to begin filling page after page once more, it would be a sign that the galaxy is aiming its messages at me.

But the only thing I succeed in writing is this diary, the



* * *



contemplation of a young woman reading a book, and I do not know what book it is. Is the extraterrestrial message contained in my diary? Or in her book?

A girl came to see me who is writing a thesis on my novels for a very important university seminar in literary studies. I see that my work serves her perfectly to demonstrate her theories, and this is certainly a positive fact— for the novels or for the theories, I do not know which. From her very detailed talk, I got the idea of a piece of work being seriously pursued, but my books seen through her eyes prove unrecognizable to me. I am sure this Lotaria (that is her name) has read them conscientiously, but I believe she has read them only to find in them what she was already convinced of before reading them.

I tried to say this to her. She retorted, a bit irritated: "Why? Would you want me to read in your books only what you're convinced of?"

I answered her: "That isn't it. I expect readers to read in my books something I didn't know, but I can expect it only from those who expect to read something they didn't know."

(Luckily I can watch with my spyglass that other woman reading and convince myself that not all readers are like this Lotaria. )

"What you want would be a passive way of reading, escapist and regressive," Lotaria said. "That's how my sister reads. It was watching her devour the novels of Silas Flannery one after the other without considering any problems that gave me the idea of using those books as the subject of my thesis. This is why I read your works, Mr. Flannery, if you want to know: to show my sister, Ludmilla, how to read an author. Even Silas Flannery."

"Thank you for that 'even.' But why didn't you bring your sister with you?"

"Ludmilla insists it's better not to know authors person-



* * *



ally, because the real person never corresponds to the image you form of him from reading his books."

I would say that she could be my ideal reader, this Ludmilla.

Yesterday evening, on entering my study, I saw the shadow of a stranger escaping through the window. I tried to pursue him, but I found no trace of him. Often I seem to hear people hidden in the bushes around the house, especially at night.

Though I leave the house as little as possible, I have the impression that someone is disturbing my papers. More than once I have discovered that some pages were missing from my manuscripts. A few days afterward I would find the pages in their place again. But often I no longer recognize my manuscripts, as if I had forgotten what I had written, or as if overnight I were so changed that I no longer recognized myself in the self of yesterday.

I asked Lotaria if she has already read some books of mine that I lent her. She said no, because here she doesn't have a computer at her disposal.

She explained to me that a suitably programmed computer can read a novel in a few minutes and record the list of all the words contained in the text, in order of frequency. 'That way I can have an already completed reading at hand," Lotaria says, "with an incalculable saving of time. What is the reading of a text, in fact, except the recording of certain thematic recurrences, certain insistences of forms and meanings? An electronic reading supplies me with a list of the frequencies, which I have only to glance at to form an idea of the problems the book suggests to my critical study. Naturally, at the highest frequencies the list records countless articles, pronouns, particles, but I don't pay them any attention. I head straight for the words richest in meaning; they can give me a fairly precise notion of the book."



* * *



Lotaria brought me some novels electronically transcribed, in the form of words listed in the order of their frequency. "In a novel of fifty to a hundred thousand words," she said to me, "I advise you to observe immediately the words that are repeated about twenty times. Look here. Words that appear nineteen times:

blood, cartridge belt, commander, do, have, immediately, it, life, seen, sentry, shots, spider, teeth, together, your... "Words that appear eighteen times:

boys, cap, come, dead, eat, enough, evening, French, go, handsome, new, passes, period, potatoes, those, until... "Don't you already have a clear idea what it's about?" Lotaria says. "There's no question: it's a war novel, all action, brisk writing, with a certain underlying violence. The narration is entirely on the surface, I would say; but to make sure, it's always a good idea to take a look at the list of words used only once, though no less important for that. Take this sequence, for example:

underarm, underbrush, undercover, underdog, underfed, underfoot, undergo, undergraduate, underground, undergrowth, underhand, underprivileged, undershirt, underwear, underweight... "No, the book isn't completely superficial, as it seemed. There must be something hidden; I can direct my research along these lines."

Lotaria shows me another series of lists. "This is an entirely different novel. It's immediately obvious. Look at the words that recur about fifty times:

had, his, husband, little, Riccardo (51) answered, been, before, has, station, what (48) all, barely, bedroom, Mario, some, times (47) morning, seemed, went, whom (46) should (45) hand, listen, until, were (43) Cecilia, Delia, evening, girl, hands, six, who, years (42) almost, alone,



* * *



could, man, returned, window (41) me, wanted (40) life (39)

"What do you think of that? An intimatist narration, subtle feelings, understated, a humble setting, everyday life in the provinces ... As a confirmation, we'll take a sample of words used a single time:

chilled, deceived, downward, engineer, enlargement, fattening, ingenious, ingenuous, injustice, jealous, kneeling, swallow, swallowed, swallowing... "So we already have an idea of the atmosphere, the moods, the social background... . We can go on to a third book:

according, account, body, especially, God, hair, money, times, went (29) evening, flour, food, rain, reason, somebody, stay, Vincenzo, wine (38) death, eggs, green, hers, legs, sweet, therefore (36) black, bosom, children, day, even, ha, head, machine, make, remained, stays, stuffs, white, would (35) "Here I would say we're dealing with a full-blooded story, violent, everything concrete, a bit brusque, with a direct sensuality, no refinement, popular eroticism. But here again, let's go on to the list of words with a frequency of one. Look, for example:

ashamed, shame, shamed, shameful, shameless, shames, shaming, vegetables, verify, vermouth, virgins... "You see? A guilt complex, pure and simple! A valuable indication: the critical inquiry can start with that, establish some working hypotheses.... What did I tell you? Isn't this a quick, effective system?"

The idea that Lotaria reads my books in this way creates some problems for me. Now, every time I write a word, I see it spun around by the electronic brain, ranked



* * *



according to its frequency, next to other words whose identity I cannot know, and so I wonder how many times I have used it, I feel the whole responsibility of writing weigh on those isolated syllables, I try to imagine what conclusions can be drawn from the fact that I have used this word once or fifty times. Maybe it would be better for me to erase it.... But whatever other word I try to use seems unable to withstand the test.... Perhaps instead of a book I could write lists of words, in alphabetical order, an avalanche of isolated words which expresses that truth I still do not know, and from which the computer, reversing its program, could construct the book, my book.

I have encountered the sister of that Lotaria who is writing a thesis on me. She came unannounced, as if she were passing the house by chance. She said, "I am Ludmilla. I have read all your novels."

Aware that she didn't want to know authors personally, I was surprised to see her. She said her sister always had a partial view of things; for this reason, too, after Lotaria had spoken to her of our meetings, she wanted to check in person, as if to confirm my existence, since I correspond to her ideal model of writer.

This ideal model—to say it in her words—is the author who produces books "as a pumpkin vine produces pumpkins." She also used other metaphors of natural processes that follow their course unperturbed—the wind that shapes the mountain, the wrack of the tides, the annual circles in the bole of trees—but these were metaphors of literary creation in general, whereas the image of the pumpkin referred directly to me.

"Are you angry with your sister?" I asked her, feeling in her words a polemical tone, as of someone accustomed to sustaining her own opinions in argument with others.

"No, with somebody else whom you also know," she said.



* * *



Without too much effort I was able to elicit the story behind her visit. Ludmilla is the friend, or the ex-friend, of that translator Marana, for whom literature is more worthwhile the more it consists of elaborate devices, a complex of cogs, tricks, traps.

"And, in your opinion, what I do is different?"

"I've always thought that you write the way some animals dig holes or build anthills or make beehives."

"I'm not sure what you say is very flattering for me," I replied. "In any case, here, now that you see me, I hope you haven't been disappointed. Do I correspond to the image you had formed of Silas Flannery?"

"I'm not disappointed. On the contrary. But not because you correspond to an image: because you are an absolutely ordinary person, as I was expecting, in fact."

"My novels give you the idea of an ordinary person?"

"No, you see ... The novels of Silas Flannery are something so well characterized ... it seems they were already there before, before you wrote them, in all their details.... It's as if they passed through you, using you because you know how to write, since, after all, there has to be somebody to write them.... I wish I could watch you while you're writing, to see if it really is like that...."

I feel a stab of pain. For this girl I am nothing but an impersonal graphic energy, ready to shift from the unexpressed into writing an imaginary world that exists independently of me. God help me if she knew that I no longer have anything of what she imagines: neither expressive energy nor something to express.

"What do you think you would be able to see? I can't write if somebody is watching me ..." I reply.

She explains that she believes she has understood this: the truth of literature consists only in the physicality of the act of writing.

"The physicality of the act..." These words start whirling in my mind, become associated with images I try in



* * *



vain to dispel. "The physicality of existing," I stammer. "There, you see, I am here, I am a man who exists, facing you, your physical presence...." And a keen jealousy invades me, not of other people, but of that me made of ink and periods and commas, who wrote the novels I will write no more, the author who continues to enter the privacy of this young woman, while I, I here and now, with the physical energy I feel surging, much more reliable than the creative impulse, I am separated from her by the immense distance of a keyboard and a white page on the roller.

"Communication can be established at various levels," I start explaining; I approach her with movements surely a bit hasty, but the visual and tactile images whirling in my mind urge me to eliminate all separation and all delay.

Ludmilla struggles, frees herself. "Why, what are you doing, Mr. Flannery? That isn't the point! You're mistaken!"

True, I could have made my passes with a bit more style, but at this point it's too late for amends: it's all or nothing now. I continue chasing her around the desk, uttering sentences whose complete foolishness I recognize, such as, "Perhaps you think I'm too old, but on the contrary ..."

"It's all a misunderstanding, Mr. Flannery," Ludmilla says, and stops, placing between us the bulk of Webster's International Dictionary. "I could easily make love with you; you're a nice, pleasant-looking gentleman. But this would have no relevance to the problem we were discussing.... It would have nothing to do with the author Silas Flannery whose novels I read.... As I was explaining to you, you are two separate persons, whose relationships cannot interact.... I have no doubt that you are concretely this person and not another, though I do find you very similar to many men I have known, but the one who interested me was the other, the Silas Flannery who



* * *



exists in the works of Silas Flannery, independently of you, here...."

I wipe the sweat from my forehead. I sit down. Something in me has gone: perhaps the ego, perhaps the content of the ego. But wasn't this what I wanted? Isn't depersonalization what I was trying to achieve?

Perhaps Marana and Ludmilla came to tell me the same thing, but I do not know whether it is a liberation or a condemnation. Why have they come to see me particularly, at the moment when I feel most chained to myself, as in a prison?

The moment Ludmilla left I rushed to the spyglass to find solace in the sight of the woman in the deck chair. But she was not there. I began to wonder: what if she were the same one who came to see me? Perhaps it is always and only she who is at the source of all my problems. Perhaps there is a plot to keep me from writing, in which Ludmilla and her sister and the translator are all involved.

"The novels that attract me most," Ludmilla said, "are those that create an illusion of transparency around a knot of human relationships as obscure, cruel, and perverse as possible."

I do not understand whether she has said this to explain what attracts her in my novels, or whether it is what she would like to find in my novels and does not.

The quality of perennial dissatisfaction seems to me characteristic of Ludmilla: it seems to me that her preferences change overnight and today reflect only her restlessness (but in coming back to see me, she seems to have forgotten everything that happened yesterday).

"With my spyglass I can observe a woman who is reading on a terrace in the valley," I told her. "I wonder if the books she reads are calming or upsetting."

"How does the woman seem to you? Calm or upset?"



* * *



"Calm."

"Then she reads upsetting books."

I told Ludmilla the strange ideas that come to me about my manuscripts: how they disappear, return, are no longer what they were before. She told me to be very careful: there is a plot of the apocryphers which has its ramifications everywhere. I asked her if the leader of the plot was her ex-friend.

"Conspiracies always escape from the hands of their leaders," she answered, evasively.

Apocrypha (from the Greek apokryphos, hidden, secret): (1) originally referring to the "secret books" of religious sects; later to texts not recognized as canonical in those religions which have established a canon of revealed writings; (2) referring to texts falsely attributed to a period or to an author.

Thus the dictionaries. Perhaps my true vocation was that of author of apocrypha, in the several meanings of the term: because writing always means hiding something in such a way that it then is discovered; because the truth that can come from my pen is like a shard that has been chipped from a great boulder by a violent impact, then flung far away; because there is no certitude outside falsification.

I would like to find Ermes Marana again to propose we go into partnership and flood the world with apocrypha. But where is Marana now? Has he gone back to Japan? I try to make Ludmilla talk about him, hoping she will say something specific. According to her, for his activity the counterfeiter needs to hide in territories where novelists are numerous and productive, so he can camouflage his falsifications, mixing them with a flourishing production of genuine raw materials.

"So he's gone back to Japan, then?" But Ludmilla seems



* * *



unaware of any connection between Japan and that man. She places the secret base of the treacherous translator's machinations in quite a different part of the globe. According to his latest messages, Ermes has covered his tracks somewhere near the Cordillera of the Andes. Ludmilla, in any case, is interested in only one thing: that he remain far away. She had taken refuge in these mountains to elude him; now that she is sure of not encountering him, she can go home.

"You mean you're about to leave?" I ask her.

"Tomorrow morning," she tells me.

The news gives me a great sadness. Suddenly I feel alone.

I have spoken again with the flying-saucer observers. This time it was they who came to see me, to check whether by chance I had written the book dictated by the extraterrestrials.

"No, but I know where this book can be found," I said, approaching the spyglass. For some time I have had the idea that the interplanetary book could be the one the girl in the deck chair is reading.

On the familiar terrace the girl was not to be seen. Disappointed, I was shifting the spyglass around the valley when I saw, seated on a rocky ledge, a man in city clothes, intent on reading a book. The coincidence was so timely that it was not unwarranted to think of an extraterrestrial intervention.

"There's the book you're after," I said to those youngsters, handing them the spyglass trained on the stranger.

One by one they put an eye to the lens, then exchanged some looks, thanked me, and went out.

I have received a visit from a Reader, who came to submit to me a problem that upsets him: he has found two copies of my book In a network of lines that et cetera,



* * *



identical on the outside, but containing two different novels. One is the story of a professor who cannot bear to hear the telephone ring, the other is the story of a billionaire who collects kaleidoscopes. Unfortunately, he was unable to tell me much more, and he was unable to show me the volumes, because before he could finish them, both were stolen, the second less than a kilometer from here.

He was still distraught over this strange episode; he told me that before presenting himself at my home he wanted to make sure I was in, and at the same time he wanted to continue reading the book, in order to discuss it with me with complete self-confidence; so with the book in his hand he had sat down on a rocky ledge from which he could keep an eye on my chalet. At a certain point he found himself surrounded by a troop of lunatics who flung themselves on the book. Around this book his insane captors improvised a kind of ritual, one of them holding it up and the others contemplating it with profound devotion. Heedless of his protests, they then ran off into the wood, taking the volume with them.

"These valleys teem with odd characters," I said to him, to calm him. "Don't give that book any more thought, sir; you haven't lost anything important: it was a fake, produced in Japan. To exploit illegally the success that my novels enjoy in the world, an unscrupulous Japanese firm disseminates books with my name on the cover which, however, are really plagiarisms from little-known Japanese authors of novels that, having had no success, were sent to be pulped. After much investigation, I have managed to unmask this fraud of which both I and the plagiarized authors are the victims."

"Actually, I rather liked that novel I was reading," the Reader confesses, "and I regret not having been able to follow the story to the end."

"If that's your only problem, I can tell you the source:



* * *



it is a Japanese novel, summarily adapted, with Western names given to true characters and places. The original is On the carpet of leaves illuminated by the moon by Takakumi Ikoka, an author, for that matter, who is more than worthy. I can give you an English translation, to compensate you for your loss."

I picked up the volume, which was on my desk, and gave it to him, after sealing it in an envelope, so he would not be tempted to leaf through it and thus would not immediately realize it had nothing in common with In a network of lines that intersect or with any other novel of mine, apocryphal or genuine.

"I knew there were false Flannerys around," the Reader said, "and I was already convinced that at least one of those two was a fake. But what can you tell me about the other?"

Perhaps it was unwise for me to go on informing this man of my problems. I tried to save the situation with a witticism: "The only books I recognize as mine are those I must still write."

The Reader confined himself to a polite little smile, then turned grave again and said, "Mr. Flannery, I know who's behind this business: it's not the Japanese, it's a certain Ermes Marana, who has started the whole thing from jealousy over a young woman whom you know, Ludmilla Vipiteno."

"Why have you come to see me, then?" I replied. "Go to that gentleman and ask him how things stand." I began to suspect that between the Reader and Ludmilla there was a bond, and this was enough to make my voice take on a hostile tone.

"I have no choice," the Reader agreed. "I have, in fact, the opportunity to make a business trip to the area where he is, in South America, and I will take advantage of it to look for him."

I was not interested in informing him that, to my



* * *



knowledge, Ermes Marana works for the Japanese and the headquarters of his apocrypha is in Japan. For me the important thing was for this nuisance to go as far away as possible from Ludmilla: so I encouraged him to make his trip and to undertake the most careful search until he found the ghost translator.

The Reader is beset by mysterious coincidences. He told me that, for some time, and for the most disparate reasons, he has had to interrupt his reading of novels after a few pages.

"Perhaps they bore you," I said, with my usual tendency toward pessimism.

"On the contrary, I am forced to stop reading just when they become most gripping. I can't wait to resume, but when I think I am reopening the book I began, I find a completely different book before me...."

"Which instead is terribly boring," I suggest.

"No, even more gripping. But I can't manage to finish this one, either. And so on."

"Your case gives me new hope," I said to him. "With me, more and more often I happen to pick up a novel that has just appeared and I find myself reading the same book I have read a hundred times."

I have pondered my last conversation with that Reader. Perhaps his reading is so intense that it consumes all the substance of the novel at the start, so nothing remains for the rest. This happens to me in writing: for some time now, every novel I begin writing is exhausted shortly after the beginning, as if I had already said everything I have to say.

I have had the idea of writing a novel composed only of beginnings of novels. The protagonist could be a Reader who is continually interrupted. The Reader buys the new novel A by the author Z. But it is a defective copy, he



* * *



can't go beyond the beginning.... He returns to the bookshop to have the volume exchanged...

I could write it all in the second person: you, Reader ... I could also introduce a young lady, the Other Reader, and a counterfeiter-translator, and an old writer who keeps a diary like this diary....

But I wouldn't want the young lady Reader, in escaping the Counterfeiter, to end up in the arms of the Reader. I will see to it that the Reader sets out on the trail of the Counterfeiter, hiding in some very distant country, so the Writer can remain alone with the young lady, the Other Reader.

To be sure, without a female character, the Reader's journey would lose liveliness: he must encounter some other woman on his way. Perhaps the Other Reader could have a sister....

Actually, it seems the Reader really is about to leave. He will take with him On the carpet of leaves illuminated by the moon by Takakumi Ikoka, to read on his journey.



* * *



On the carpet of leaves illuminated by the moon

The ginkgo leaves fell like fine rain from the boughs and dotted the lawn with yellow. I was walking with Mr. Okeda on the path of smooth stones. I said I would like to distinguish the sensation of each single ginkgo leaf from the sensation of all the others, but I was wondering if it would be possible. Mr. Okeda said it was possible. The premises from which I set out, and which Mr. Okeda considered well founded, were the following. If from the ginkgo tree a single little yellow leaf falls and rests on the lawn, the sensation felt in looking at it is that of a single yellow leaf. If two leaves descend from the tree, the eye follows the twirling of the two leaves as they move closer, then separate in the air, like two butterflies chasing each other, then glide finally to the grass, one here, one there. And so with three, with four, even with five; as the number of leaves spinning in the air increases further, the sensations corresponding to each of them are summed up, creating a general sensation like that of a silent rain, and —if the slightest breath of wind slows their descent—that of wings suspended in the air, and then that of a scattering of little luminous spots, when you lower your gaze to



* * *



the lawn. Now, without losing anything of these pleasant general sensations, I would like to maintain distinct, not confusing it with the others, the individual image of each leaf from the moment it enters the visual field, and follow it in its aerial dance until it comes to rest on the blades of grass. Mr. Okeda's approval encouraged me to persevere in this purpose. Perhaps—I added, contemplating the form of the ginkgo leaf, a little yellow fan with scalloped edges—I could succeed in keeping distinct in the sensation of every leaf the sensation of every lobe of the leaf. On this point Mr. Okeda would not commit himself; at other times in the past his silence had served me as a warning not to let myself go in hasty conjectures, skipping a series of stages not yet checked. Bearing this lesson in mind, I began to concentrate my attention on capturing the tiniest sensations at the moment of their delineation, when their clarity was not yet mingled with a sheaf of diffused impressions.

Makiko, the youngest Okeda daughter, came to serve the tea, with her self-possessed movements and her still slightly childish grace. As she bent over, I saw on her bare nape, below her gathered hair, a fine black down which seemed to continue along the line of her back. I was concentrated on looking at it when I felt on me Mr. Okeda's motionless eye, examining me. Certainly he realized I was practicing on his daughter's neck my ability to isolate sensations. I did not look away, both because the impression of that tender down on the pale skin had overpowered me imperiously, and because, though it would have been easy for Mr. Okeda to direct my attention elsewhere with some common remark, he had not done so. In any event, Makiko soon finished serving the tea and rose again. I stared at a mole she had above her lip, to the left, and that brought back to me something of the earlier sensation, but more faintly. Makiko at first looked at me, upset, then lowered her eyes.



* * *



In the afternoon there was a moment I shall not easily forget, though I realize how trivial it seems in the telling. We were strolling on the bank of the little northern lake, with Makiko and her mother, Madame Miyagi. Mr. Okeda was walking ahead by himself, leaning on a long cane of white maple. In the center of the lake, two fleshy flowers of an autumn-blooming water lily had opened, and Madame Miyagi expressed the wish to pick them, one for herself and one for her daughter. Madame Miyagi had her usual frowning and slightly weary expression, but with that hint of stern obstinacy which made me suspect that in the long story of her troubled relations with her husband, about which there was so much gossip, her role was not merely that of the victim; and in truth, between Mr. Okeda's icy detachment and her own stubborn determination, I could not say who finally got the better. As for Makiko, she always displayed the gay and carefree air with which certain children who grow up amid bitter family dissension defend themselves against their surroundings, and she had borne it within her, growing up, and now faced the world of outsiders with it as if taking refuge behind the shield of an unripened and elusive bliss.

Kneeling on a rock at the bank, I leaned out until I could grasp the nearest shoot of the floating water lily, and I tugged at it gently, careful not to break it, to make the whole plant float toward the shore. Madame Miyagi and her daughter also knelt and stretched their hands out toward the water, ready to grasp the flowers when they came within reach. The bank of the little lake was low and sloping; to lean forward without too much risk, the two women remained behind my back, stretching out their arms, mother on one side, daughter on the other. At a certain moment I felt a contact in a precise point, between arm and back, at the level of the first ribs; or, rather, two different contacts, to the left and to the right. On Miss Makiko's side, it was a tense and almost throb-



* * *



bing tip, whereas on Madame Miyagi's side, an insinuating, grazing pressure. I realized that, through a rare and sweet chance, I had been grazed at the same moment by the left nipple of the daughter and the right nipple of the mother, and that I must bend every effort not to lose that chance contact and to appreciate the two simultaneous sensations, distinguishing them and comparing their spells.

"Push the leaves away," Mr. Okeda said, "and the stem of the flowers will bend toward your hands." He was standing over the group of the three of us as we leaned toward the water lilies. In his hand he had the long cane with which it would have been easy for him to pull the aquatic plant close to the shore; instead he confined himself to advising the two women to perform the movement that prolonged the pressure of their bodies against mine.

The two water lilies had almost reached the hands of Miyagi and Makiko. I rapidly calculated that at the moment of the last yank, by raising my right elbow and immediately pressing it again to my side, I could squeeze Makiko's tiny, firm breast, whole. But the triumph of the water lilies' capture upset the order of our movements, and so my right arm closed over a void, whereas my left hand, which had abandoned its hold on the shoot, fell back and encountered the lap of Madame Miyagi, who seemed prepared to receive it and almost hold it, with a yielding start which was communicated to my whole person. At this moment something was determined that later had incalculable consequences, as I will recount in time.

Passing again beneath the ginkgo, I said to Mr. Okeda that in the contemplation of the shower of leaves the fundamental thing was not so much the perception of each of the leaves as of the distance between one leaf and another, the empty air that separated them. What I seemed to have understood was this: an absence of sensations over a broad part of the perceptive field is the condition



* * *



necessary for our sensitivity to concentrate locally and temporally, just as in music a basic silence is necessary so that the notes will stand out against it.

Mr. Okeda said that in tactile sensations this was certainly true; I was much amazed by his reply, because I had indeed thought of my contact with the bodies of his daughter and wife while I was communicating to him my observations on the leaves. Mr. Okeda continued talking about tactile sensations with great naturalness, as if it were understood that my discourse had had no other subject.

To shift the conversation to different ground, I tried to make the comparison with the reading of a novel in which a very calm narrative pace, all on the same subdued note, serves to enforce some subtle and precise sensations to which the writer wishes to call the reader's attention; but in the case of the novel you must consider that in the succession of sentences only one sensation can pass at a time, whether it be individual or general, whereas the breadth of the visual field and the auditory field allows the simultaneous recording of a much richer and more complex whole. The reader's receptivity with respect to the collection of sensations that the novel wants to direct at him is found to be much reduced, first by the fact that his often hasty and absent reading does not catch or neglects a certain number of signals and intentions actually contained in the text, and second because there is always something essential that remains outside the written sentence; indeed, the things that the novel does not say are necessarily more numerous than those it does say, and only a special halo around what is written can give the illusion that you are reading also what is unwritten. At all these reflections of mine, Mr. Okeda remained silent, as he does always when I happen to talk too much and am unable finally to extricate myself from my tangled reasoning.



* * *



In the following days I happened to find myself very often alone in the house with the two women, because Mr. Okeda had decided to carry out personally the library research that until then had been my chief task, and he preferred instead for me to remain in his study, putting his monumental card file in order. I had well-founded fears that Mr. Okeda had got wind of my conversations with Professor Kawasaki and had guessed my intention to break away from his school to approach academic circles that would guarantee my future prospects. Certainly, remaining too long under Mr. Okeda's intellectual tutelage was harming me: I could sense it from the sarcastic remarks Professor Kawasaki's assistants made about me, though they were not aloof to all relations with other tendencies, as my fellow students were. There was no doubt that Mr. Okeda wanted to keep me all day at his house to prevent me from spreading my wings, to curb my freedom of thought as he had done with his other students, who were by now reduced to spying on one another and denouncing one another for the slightest deviation from absolute subjection to the master's authority. I had to make up my mind as soon as possible and take my leave of Mr. Okeda; and if I postponed it, this was only because the mornings at his house during his absence produced in me a mental state of pleasant excitement, though of scant profit to my work.

In fact, in my work I was often distracted; I sought every pretext to go into the other rooms, where I might come upon Makiko, catch her in her privacy during the various situations of the day. But more often I found Madame Miyagi in my path, and I lingered with her, because, with the mother, opportunities for conversation— and also for sly joking, though often tinged with bitterness —arose more easily than with the daughter.

At supper in the evening, around the piping-hot suki-yaki, Mr. Okeda examined our faces as if the secrets of the



* * *



day were written there, the network of desires, distinct and yet interconnected, in which I felt myself wrapped and from which I would not have liked to free myself before having satisfied them one by one. And so from week to week I postponed my decision to take leave of him and my poorly paid job with no prospects of a career, and I realized that it was he, Mr. Okeda, who kept tightening, strand by strand, the net that held me.

It was a serene autumn. As the November full moon approached, I found myself conversing one afternoon with Makiko about the most suitable place for observing the moon through the branches of the trees. I insisted that on the path under the ginkgo tree the carpet of fallen leaves would spread the moon's reflected glow in a suspended luminosity. There was a definite intention in what I said: to propose to Makiko a meeting under the ginkgo that same night. The girl answered that the lake was preferable, since the autumn moon, when the season is cold and dry, is reflected in the water with sharper outlines than the moon of summer, often shrouded in mists.

"I agree," I said hastily. "I can't wait to be with you on the shore at the moonrise. Especially"—I added—"since the lake stirs delicate sensations in my memory."

Perhaps as I uttered that sentence the contact of Makiko's breast returned to my memory too vividly, and my voice sounded aroused, alarming her. The fact is that Makiko frowned and remained a moment in silence. To dispel this awkwardness which I did not want to have interrupt the amorous daydreaming to which I was abandoning myself, I made an unwise and involuntary movement of the mouth: I bared and clenched my teeth as if to bite. Instinctively Makiko jumped back with an expression of sudden pain, as if she had really been given a bite at some sensitive spot. She recovered herself at once and left the room. I prepared to follow her.

Madame Miyagi was in the next room, sitting on a mat



* * *



on the floor, carefully arranging flowers and autumn branches in a pot. Advancing like a sleepwalker, unaware, I found her crouched at my feet, and I stopped just in time to avoid hitting her and knocking over the branches, striking them with my legs. Makiko's movement had roused in me an immediate stimulation, and this condition of mine did not escape Madame Miyagi, since my careless steps had brought me upon her in that way. In any case, the lady, without raising her eyes, shook against me the camellia blossom she was arranging in the pot, as if she wanted to hit or thrust back that part of me extending over her or even toy with it, provoke it, arouse it with a striking caress. I lowered my hands to try to save from disorder the arrangement of the leaves and flowers; meanwhile, she was also dealing with the branches, leaning forward; and it so happened that at the very moment when one of my hands slipped in confusion between Madame Miyagi's kimono and her bare skin and found itself clasping a soft and warm breast, elongated in form, one of the lady's hands, from among the branches of the keiyaki [translator's note: in Europe called Caucasian elm], had reached my member and was holding it in a firm, frank grasp, drawing it from my garments as if she were performing the operation of stripping away leaves.

What aroused my interest in Madame Miyagi's breast was the circle of prominent papillae, of a thick or minute grain, scattered on the surface of an areola of considerable extension, thicker at the edge but with outposts all the way to the tip. Presumably each of these papillae commanded sensations more or less sharp in the receptivity of Madame Miyagi, a phenomenon I could easily verify by subjecting them to slight pressure, localized as much as possible, at intervals of about a second, while observing the direct reactions in the nipple and the indirect ones in the lady's general behavior, and also my own reactions, since a certain reciprocity had clearly been established



* * *



between her sensitivity and mine. I conducted this delicate tactile reconnaissance not only with my fingertips but also by arranging in the most suitable fashion for my member to glide over her bosom with a grazing and encircling caress, since the position in which we had happened to find ourselves favored the encounter of these diversely erogenous zones of ours, and since she indicated her liking and her encouragement by authoritatively guiding these routes. It so happens that my skin also, along the course of the member and especially in the protuberant part of its culmination, has points and passages of special sensitivity that range from the extremely pleasant to the enjoyable to the scratchy to the painful, just as there are points and passages that are toneless or deaf. The fortuitous or calculated encounter of the different sensitive or hypersensitive terminations, hers and mine, prompted an array of various reactions, whose inventory looked to be extremely laborious for us both.

We were intent on these exercises when, rapidly, from the opening of the sliding door, Makiko's form appeared. Obviously the girl had remained in expectation of my pursuit and was now coming to see what obstacle had delayed me. She realized at once and vanished, but not so quickly as not to allow me time to notice that something in her dress had changed: she had replaced her tight sweater with a silk dressing gown which seemed made purposely to keep falling open, to become loosened by the internal pressure of what was flowering in her, to slide over her smooth skin at the first attack of that greed for contact which that smooth skin of hers could not fail, in fact, to arouse.

"Makiko!" I cried, because I wanted to explain to her (but really I would not have known where to begin) that the position in which she had surprised me with her mother was due only to a casual confluence of circumstances that had routed along detours a desire which was



* * *



unmistakably directed at her, Makiko. Desire that her silk robe, loosened or waiting to be loosened, now heightened and rewarded as in an explicit offer, so that with Makiko's apparition in my eyes and Madame Miyagi's contact on my skin I was about to be overcome by voluptuousness.

Madame Miyagi must have become clearly aware of this, for, grasping my back, she pulled me down with her on the mat and with rapid twitches of her whole person she slipped her moist and prehensile sex under mine, which without a false move was swallowed as if by a sucker, while her thin naked legs clutched my hips. She was of a sharp agility, Madame Miyagi: her feet in their white cotton socks crossed at my sacroiliac, holding me as if in a vise.

My appeal to Makiko had not gone unheard. Behind the paper panel of the sliding door there was the outline of the girl, kneeling on the mat, moving her head forward, and now from the doorway her face appeared, contracted in a breathless expression, her lips parted, her eyes widened, following her mother's and my starts with attraction and disgust. But she was not alone: beyond the corridor, in the opening of another door, a man's form was standing motionless. I have no idea how long Mr. Okeda had been there. He was staring hard, not at his wife and me but at his daughter watching us. In his cold pupil, in the firm twist of his lips, was reflected Madame Miyagi's orgasm reflected in her daughter's gaze.

He saw that I was seeing. He did not move. I realized at that moment that he would not interrupt me, nor would he drive me from the house, that he would never refer to this episode or to others that might take place and be repeated; I realized also that this connivance would give me no power over him, nor would it make my submission less burdensome. It was a secret that bound me to him but not him to me: I could reveal to no one what he was watching without admitting an indecorous complicity on my part.



* * *



What could I do now? I was destined to become more and more ensnared in a tangle of misunderstandings, because now Makiko considered me one of her mother's numerous lovers and Miyagi knew that I lived only for her daughter, and both would make me pay cruelly, whereas the gossip of the academic community, so quick to spread, nourished by the malice of my fellow students, ready to help also in this way their master's calculations, would throw a slanderous light on my frequent presence in the Okeda home, discrediting me in the eyes of the university professors on whom I most counted to change my situation.

Though tormented by these circumstances, I managed to concentrate and subdivide the generic sensation of my sex pressed by the sex of Madame Miyagi into the compartmented sensations of the individual points of me and of her, progressively subjected to pressure by my sliding movements and her convulsive contractions. This application especially helped me to prolong the state necessary to the observation itself, delaying the precipitation of the final crisis by evincing moments of insensitivity or partial sensitivity, which in their turn merely enhanced immeasurably the immediate return of voluptuous stimuli, distributed in an unpredictable fashion in space and time. "Makiko! Makiko!" I moaned in Madame Miyagi's ear, associating convulsively those instants of hypersensitivity with the image of her daughter and the range of sensations incomparably different which I imagined she could arouse in me. And to maintain control of my reactions I thought of the description I would make of them that same evening to Mr. Okeda: the shower of little ginkgo leaves is characterized by the fact that in each moment each leaf that is falling is found at a different altitude from the others, whereby the empty and insensitive space in which the visual sensations are situated can be subdivided into a succession of levels in each of which we find one little leaf twirling and one alone.



* * *



[9]

You fasten your seatbelt. The plane is landing. To fly is the opposite of traveling: you cross a gap in space, you vanish into the void, you accept not being in any place for a duration that is itself a kind of void in time; then you reappear, in a place and in a moment with no relation to the where and the when in which you vanished. Meanwhile, what do you do? How do you occupy this absence of yourself from the world and of the world from you? You read; you do not raise your eyes from the book between one airport and the other, because beyond the page there is the void, the anonymity of stopovers, of the metallic uterus that contains you and nourishes you, of the passing crowd always different and always the same. You might as well stick with this other abstraction of travel, accomplished by the anonymous uniformity of typographical characters: here, too, it is the evocative power of the names that persuades you that you are flying over something and not nothingness. You realize that it takes considerable heedlessness to entrust yourself to unsure instruments, handled with approximation; or perhaps this demonstrates an invincible tendency to passivity, to regression, to infantile dependence. (But are you reflecting on the air journey or on reading? )

The plane is landing; you have not managed to finish the novel On the carpet of leaves illuminated by the moon by Takakumi Ikoka. You continue reading as you come down the steps, sit in the bus that crosses the field, stand in the line at passport control and at customs. You are moving forward, holding the book open in front of your eyes, when someone slips it out of your hand, and as if at the rising of a curtain you see policemen arrayed before you, draped in leather cartridge belts, rattling with automatic weapons, gilded with eagles and epaulets.



* * *



"But my book..." you complain, extending with an infant's gesture an unarmed hand toward that authoritative barrier of glistening buttons and weapon muzzles. "Confiscated, sir. This book cannot enter Ataguitania. It's a banned book."

"But how can that be ... ? A book on autumn leaves ... ? What gives you the right... ?"

"It's on the list of books to be confiscated. These are our laws. Are you trying to teach us our job?" Rapidly, from one word to the next, from one syllable to the next, the tone shifts from dry to curt, from curt to intimidating, from intimidating to threatening.

"But I... I had almost finished...."

"Forget it," a voice behind you whispers. "Don't start anything, not with these guys. Don't worry about the book; I have a copy, too. We'll talk about it later...."

It is a woman traveler, looking self-assured, skinny in slacks, wearing big sunglasses, loaded with packages, who goes past the controls like someone accustomed to it all. Do you know her? Even if it seems to you that you do know her, act as if nothing has happened: certainly she doesn't want to be seen talking to you. She has signaled you to follow her: don't lose sight of her. Outside the airport she climbs into a taxi and motions you to take the taxi after hers. In the open countryside her taxi stops; she gets out with all her packages and climbs into yours. If it weren't for her very short hair and the huge eyeglasses, you would say she resembles Lotaria.

You venture to say, "But you're—"

"Corinna. Call me Corinna."

After rummaging in her bags, Corinna pulls out a book and gives it to you.

"But this isn't it," you say, seeing on the cover an unknown title and the name of an unknown author: Around an empty grave by Calixto Bandera. "The book they confiscated was by Ikoka!"



* * *



'That's what I've given you. In Ataguitania books can circulate only with fake dust jackets."

As the taxi moves at top speed through the dusty, smelly outskirts, you cannot resist the temptation to open the book and see whether Corinna has given you the real one. Fat chance. It is a book you are seeing for the first time, and it does not look the least bit like a Japanese novel: it begins with a man riding across a mesa among the agaves, and he sees some predatory birds, called zopilotes, flying overhead.

"If the dust jacket's a fake," you remark, "the text is a fake, too."

"What were you expecting?" Corinna says. "Once the process of falsification is set in motion, it won't stop. We're in a country where everything that can be falsified has been falsified: paintings in museums, gold ingots, bus tickets. The counterrevolution and the revolution fight with salvos of falsification: the result is that nobody can be sure what is true and what is false, the political police simulate revolutionary actions and the revolutionaries disguise themselves as policemen."

"And who gains by it, in the end?"

"It's too soon to say. We have to see who can best exploit the falsifications, their own and those of the others: whether it's the police or our organization."

The taxi driver is pricking up his ears. You motion Corinna to restrain herself from making unwise remarks.

But she says, "Don't be afraid. This is a fake taxi. What really alarms me, though, is that there's another taxi following us."

"Fake or real?"

"Fake, certainly, but I don't know whether it belongs to the police or to us."

You peep back along the road. "But," you cry, "there's a third taxi following the second..."

"That could be our people checking the movements of



* * *



the police, but it could also be the police on the trail of our people...."

The second taxi passes you, stops; some armed men leap out and make you get out of your taxi. "Police! You're under arrest!" All three of you are handcuffed and forced into the second taxi: you, Corinna, and your driver.

Corinna, calm and smiling, greets the policemen: "I'm Gertrude. This is a friend. Take us to headquarters."

Are you gaping? Corinna-Gertrude whispers to you, in your language, "Don't be afraid. They're fake policemen: actually they are our men."

You have barely driven off again when the third taxi forces the second to stop. More armed men jump out of it, their faces hidden; they disarm the policemen, remove your and Corinna's handcuffs, handcuff the policemen, and fling all of you into their taxi.

Corinna-Gertrude seems indifferent. "Thanks, friends," she says. "I'm Ingrid, and this man is one of us. Are you taking us to the command post?"

"Shut up, you!" says one who seems the leader. "Don't try acting smart, you two! Now we have to blindfold you. You're our hostages."

You don't know what to think any more, also because Corinna-Gertrude-Ingrid has been taken away in the other taxi. When you are again allowed to use your limbs and your eyes, you find yourself in a police inspector's office or in a barracks. Noncoms in uniform photograph you, full-face and profile; they take your fingerprints. An officer calls, "Alfonsina!"

You see Gertrude-Ingrid-Corinna come in, also in uniform; she hands the officer a folder of documents to sign.

Meanwhile, you follow the routine from one desk to another: one policeman takes your documents into custody, another your money, a third your clothes, which are replaced with a prisoner's overalls.

"What sort of trap is this?" you manage to ask Ingrid-



* * *



Gertrude-Alfonsina, who has come over to you at a moment when your guards have their backs turned.

"Among the revolutionaries there are some counterrevolutionary infiltrators who have made us fall into a police ambush. But luckily there are also many revolutionaries who have infiltrated the police, and they have pretended to recognize me as a functionary of this command. As for you, they'll send you to a fake prison, or rather, to a real state prison that is, however, controlled not by them but by us."

You can't help thinking of Marana. Who, if not he, can have invented such a machination?

"I seem to recognize your chief's style," you say to Alfonsina.

"Who our chief is doesn't matter. He could also be a fake chief, pretending to work for the revolution for the sole purpose of favoring the counterrevolution, or one who works openly for the counterrevolution, convinced that doing so will open the way for the revolution."

"And you are collaborating with him?"

"My case is different. I'm an infiltrator, a real revolutionary infiltrated into the ranks of the false revolutionaries. But to avoid being discovered, I have to pretend to be a counterrevolutionary infiltrated among the true revolutionaries. And, in fact, I am, inasmuch as I take orders from the police; but not from the real ones, because I report to the revolutionaries infiltrated among the counterrevolutionary infiltrators."

"If I understand correctly, here everybody has infiltrated: in the police and in the revolution. But how can you tell one from the other?"

"With each person you have to discover who are the infiltrators that had him infiltrate. And even before that, you have to know who infiltrated the infiltrators."

"And you go on fighting to the last drop of blood, even knowing that nobody is what he says he is?"



* * *



"What's that got to do with it? Everybody has to do his part to the end."

"What is my part?"

"Stay calm and wait. Go on reading your book."

"Damn! I lost it when they liberated me, I mean, when they arrested me...."

"No matter. The place where you're going now is a model prison; it has a library stocked with all the latest books."

"What about the banned books?"

"Where should banned books be found if not in prison?"

(You have come all the way to Ataguitania to hunt a counterfeiter of novels, and you find yourself prisoner of a system in which every aspect of life is counterfeit, a fake. Or, rather: you were determined to venture into forests, prairies, mesas, Cordilleras on the trail of the explorer Marana, lost certainly while seeking the source of the oceanic novel, but you bang your head against the bars of the prison society which stretches all over the planet, confining adventure within its mean corridors, always the same.... Is this still your story, Reader? The itinerary you have followed for love of Ludmilla has carried you so far from her that you have lost sight of her: if she no longer is leading you, you can only entrust yourself to her diametric mirror image, Lotaria....

But can it truly be Lotaria? "I don't know who you've got it in for. You mention names I don't know," she answers you every time you try to refer to past episodes. Can it be the rule of the underground that imposes it on her? To tell the truth, you are not at all sure of the identification.... Can she be a false Corinna or a false Lotaria? The only thing you know for sure is that her function in your story is similar to Lotaria's, so the name that fits her is Lotaria, and you would not be able to call her anything else.



* * *



"Do you mean to deny you have a sister?"

"I have a sister, but I don't see what that has to do with anything."

"A sister who loves novels with characters whose psychology is upsetting and complicated?"

"My sister always says she loves novels where you feel an elemental strength, primordial, telluric. That's exactly what she says: telluric")

"You made a complaint to the prison library, on account of a defective volume," says the high official seated behind a high desk.

You heave a sigh of relief. Ever since a guard came to your cell to summon you, and made you follow corridors, go down stairs, walk through underground passages, climb more stairs, cross antechambers and offices, your apprehension has made you shudder, has given you flashes of fever. Instead, they simply wanted to process your complaint about Around an empty grave by Calixto Bandera! In the place of your anxiety, you feel reawaken in you the dismay that seized you when you saw in your hand an unglued binding that held together a few tattered, worn quires.

"Of course I complained!" you answer. "You boast so much, you people, about your model library in your model prison, and then when a person goes and asks for a book that has a proper card in the catalogue, he finds a handful of torn pages! Now I ask you how you can think of re-educating prisoners with systems like that!"

The man at the desk slowly takes off his eyeglasses. He shakes his head with a sad look. "I won't go into the details of your complaint. That's not my job. Our office, though it has close contacts both with prisons and with libraries, deals with broader problems. We sent for you, knowing you are a reader of novels, because we need advice. The forces of order—army, police, magistrature—



* * *



have always had difficulty judging whether a novel should be banned or allowed: lack of time for extensive reading, uncertainty of aesthetic and philosophical criteria on which to base the opinion.. .. No, don't fear that we want to force you to assist us in our censorship work. Modern technology will soon put us in a position to perform those tasks with rapidity and efficiency. We have machines capable of reading, analyzing, judging any written text. But it is precisely the reliability of the instruments on which we must run some checks. In our files you are listed as a reader of the sort corresponding to the average, and we see that you have read, at least in part, Around an empty grave by Calixto Bandera. We feel it would be opportune to compare your impressions of your reading with the results of a reading machine."

He has you taken into the machine room. "Allow me to introduce our programmer, Sheila."

Before you, in a white smock buttoned up to the neck, you see Corinna-Gertrude-Alfonsina, who is tending a battery of smooth metallic appliances, like dishwashers. "These are the memory units that have stored the whole text of Around an empty grave. The terminal is a printing apparatus that, as you see, can reproduce the novel word for word from the beginning to the end," the officer says. A long sheet unrolls from a kind of typewriter which, with machine-gun speed, is covering it with cold capital letters.

"Now, then, if you'll allow me, I'll take advantage of this opportunity to collect the chapters I still haven't read," you say, grazing with a shy caress the dense river of writing in which you recognize the prose that has kept you company in your prisoner's hours.

"Help yourself," the officer says. "I'll leave you with Sheila, who will insert the program we want."

Reader, you have found again the book you were seeking; now you can pick up the broken thread; the smile returns to your lips. But do you imagine it can go on in



* * *



this way, this story? No, not that of the novel! Yours! How long are you going to let yourself be dragged passively by the plot? You had flung yourself into the action, filled with adventurous impulses: and then? Your function was quickly reduced to that of one who records situations decided by others, who submits to whims, finds himself involved in events that elude his control. Then what use is your role as protagonist to you? If you continue lending yourself to this game, it means that you, too, are an accomplice of the general mystification.

You grab the girl by the wrist. "Enough of these disguises, Lotaria! How long are you going to continue letting yourself be exploited by a police regime?"

This time Sheila-Ingrid-Corinna cannot conceal a certain uneasiness. She frees her wrist from your grasp. "I don't understand who you're accusing, I don't know anything about your stories. I follow a very clear strategy. The counterpower must infiltrate the mechanisms of power in order to overthrow it."

"And then reproduce it, identically! It's no use your camouflaging yourself, Lotaria! If you unbutton one uniform, there's always another uniform underneath!"

Sheila looks at you with an air of challenge. "Unbutton ... ? Just you try...."

Now that you have decided to fight, you can't draw back. With a frantic hand you unbutton the white smock of Sheila the programmer and you discover the police uniform of Alfonsina; you rip Alfonsina's gold buttons away and you find Corinna's anorak; you pull the zipper of Corinna and you see the chevrons of Ingrid....

It is she herself who tears off the clothes that remain on her. A pair of breasts appear, firm, melon-shaped, a slightly concave stomach, the full hips of a fausse maigre, a proud pubes, two long and solid thighs.

"And this? Is this a uniform?" Sheila exclaims.

You have remained upset. "No, this, no..." you murmur.



* * *



"Yes, it is!" Sheila cries. "The body is a uniform! The body is armed militia! The body is violent action! The body claims power! The body's at war! The body declares itself subject! The body is an end and not a means! The body signifies! Communicates! Shouts! Protests! Subverts!"

With this, Sheila-Alfonsina-Gertrude has thrown herself on you, torn off your prisoner's trousers; your naked limbs mingle under the closets of electronic memories.

Reader, what are you doing? Aren't you going to resist? Aren't you going to escape? Ah, you are participating.... Ah, you fling yourself into it, too.... You're the absolute protagonist of this book, very well; but do you believe that gives you the right to have carnal relations with all the female characters? Like this, without any preparation..? Wasn't your story with Ludmilla enough to give the plot the warmth and grace of a love story? What need do you have to go also with her sister (or with somebody you identify with her sister), with this Lotaria-Corinna-Sheila, who, when you think about it, you've never even liked.... It's natural for you to want to get even, after you have followed events of pages and pages with passive resignation, but does this seem the right way to you? Or are you trying to say that even in this situation you find yourself involved, despite yourself? You know very well that this girl always acts with her head, what she thinks in theory she does in practice, to the ultimate consequences.... It was an ideological demonstration she wanted to give you, nothing else.... Why, this time, do you allow yourself to be convinced immediately by her arguments? Watch out, Reader; here everything is different from what it seems, everything is two-faced....

The flash of a bulb and the repeated click of a camera devour the whiteness of your convulsed, superimposed nudity.

"Once again, Captain Alexandra, I catch you naked in a prisoner's arms!" the invisible photographer reprimands.



* * *



"These snapshots will enrich your personal dossier...." And the voice drifts off, with a sneer.

Alfonsina-Sheila-Alexandra pulls herself up, covers herself, gives a bored look. "They never leave me in peace a moment," she huffs. "Working at the same time for two secret services fighting between themselves has this drawback: both of them constantly try to blackmail you."

You start to get up, too, and you find you are wrapped in the rolls of the printout: the beginning of the novel is unfurling on the ground like a cat that wants to play. Now it is the stories you live that break off at the climactic moment: perhaps now you will be allowed to follow the novels you read all the way to the end....

Alexandra-Sheila-Corinna, absorbed, has started pressing keys again, She has resumed her diligent manner, the kind of girl who puts her whole soul into everything she does. "There's something not working," she murmurs. "By now all of it should have come out.... What's wrong with it?"

You had already realized she's having a slightly nervous day today, Gertrude-Alfonsina; at a certain point she must have pressed the wrong key. The order of the words in the text of Calixto Bandera, preserved in the electronic memory to be brought again to light at any moment, has been erased in an instant demagnetization of the circuits. The multicolored wires now grind out the dust of dissolved words: the the the, of of of of, from from from from, that that that that, in columns according to their respective frequency. The book has been crumbled, dissolved, can no longer be recomposed, like a sand dune blown away by the wind.



* * *



Around an empty grave

When the vultures rise it's a sign the night is about to end, my father had told me. And I could hear the heavy wings flapping in the dark sky, and I could see their shadow obscure the green stars. It was a toilsome flight, which did not immediately break free of the earth, of the shadows of the bushes, as if only in flight did the feathers become convinced they were feathers and not prickly leaves. When the captors had flown off, the stars reappeared, gray, and the sky green. It was dawn, and I was riding along the deserted roads in the direction of the village of Oquedal.

"Nacho," my father had said, "as soon as I die, take my horse, my carbine, food for three days, and follow the dry bed of the stream above San Ireneo, until you see the smoke rising from the terraces of Oquedal."

"Why Oquedal?" I asked him. "Who is at Oquedal? Who should I look for?"

My father's voice became more and more faint and slow, his face more and more purple. "I must reveal to you a secret I have kept for many years.... It is a long story...."



* * *



In those words my father was spending the last breath of his mortal agony, and I, knowing his tendency to digress, to lard all his talk with divagations, glosses, parentheses, and flashbacks, was afraid he would never arrive at communicating the essential thing to me. "Hurry, Father, tell me the name of the person I am to ask for on arriving at Oquedal...."

"Your mother ... Your mother, whom you do not know, lives at Oquedal.... Your mother, who has not seen you since you were in swaddling clothes..."

I had known that before dying he would talk to me about my mother. He owed it to me, after having made me live through my childhood and adolescence without knowing what she looked like or what name she had, the woman who had borne me, or why he had torn me from that breast when I was still sucking its milk, to drag me after him in his vagabond, fugitive life. "Who is my mother? Tell me her name!" About my mother he had told me many stories, at the time when I had not yet tired of asking about her, but they were stories, inventions, and each contradicted the others: at one time she was a poor beggar, at another a foreign lady traveling in a red automobile, once a cloistered nun, and once a circus rider; in one story she died giving birth to me, in another she was lost in an earthquake. And so the day came when I decided I would ask no more questions and would wait until he spoke to me of her. I had just turned sixteen when my father was stricken with yellow fever.

"Let me tell it from the beginning," he said, gasping. "When you have got to Oquedal, and have said: I am Nacho, son of Don Anastasio Zamora, you will have to hear many things about me, untrue stories, lies, calumny. I want you to know...."

"The name! My mother's name! Quickly!"

"Now. The moment has come for you to know...."

No, that moment did not come. After having rambled in



* * *



vain prefaces, my father's speech was lost in a death rattle and was extinguished forever. The young man who was now riding in the darkness along the steep roads above San Ireneo was still ignorant of the origins with which he was about to be reunited.

I had taken the road that flanks the deep chasm, high above the dry stream. The dawn, which remained suspended over the jagged edges of the forest, seemed to open to me not a new day but a day that came before all the other days, new in the sense of the time when days were still new, like the first day when men understood what a day was.

And as the day grew bright enough for me to see the other side of the chasm, I realized that a road ran along there, too, and a man on horseback was proceeding parallel to me, in the same direction, with a long-barreled army rifle hanging over one shoulder.

"Hey!" I shouted. "How far are we from Oquedal?"

He didn't even turn around; or, rather, worse than that: for an instant my voice made him move his head (otherwise I might have believed he was deaf) but he immediately returned his gaze to the road before him and went on riding without deigning me an answer or a sign of greeting.

"Hey! I asked you a question! Are you deaf? Are you dumb?" I shouted, as he continued swaying in his saddle with the gait of his black horse.

There was no knowing how long we had been advancing in the night, paired like this, separated by the steep chasm of the stream. What had seemed to me the irregular echo of my mare's hoofs resounding from the rough limestone of the other bank was, in reality, the clatter of those hoofs accompanying me.

He was a young man, all back and neck, with a tattered straw hat. Offended by his inhospitable behavior, I spurred on my mare, to leave him behind, to remove him



* * *



from my sight. I had barely passed him when for some unknown reason I was inspired to turn my head toward him. He had slipped the rifle from his shoulder and was raising it to aim it at me. I immediately dropped my hand to the butt of my carbine, stuck in the saddle holster. He slung his rifle over his shoulder again as if nothing had happened. From that moment on, we proceeded at the same pace, on opposite banks, keeping an eye on each other, careful not to turn our backs. It was my mare who adjusted her gait to that of the black stallion, as if she had understood.

The story adjusts its gait to the slow progress of the iron-bound hoofs on climbing paths, toward a place that contains the secret of the past and of the future, which contains time coiled around itself like a lasso hanging from the pommel of a saddle. I already know that the long road leading me to Oquedal will be less long than the one left for me to follow once I have reached that last village at the frontier of the inhabited world, at the frontier of the time of my life.

"I am Nacho, son of Don Anastasio Zamora," I said to the old Indian huddled against the wall of the church. "Where is the house?"

Perhaps he knows, I was thinking.

The old man raised his red eyelids, gnarled as a turkey's. One finger—a finger as thin as the twigs they use to light the fire—emerged from beneath the poncho and pointed toward the palace of the Alvarado family, the only palace in that heap of clotted mud that is the village of Oquedal: a baroque façade that seems to have happened there by mistake, like a piece of scenery in an abandoned theater. Someone many centuries ago must have believed that this was the land of gold; and when he realized his error, for the palace, barely built, began the slow destiny of ruins.

Following the steps of a servant who has taken my



* * *



horse into his keeping, I pass through a series of places that ought to be more and more interior, whereas instead I find myself more and more outside; from one courtyard I move to another courtyard, as if in this palace all the doors served only for leaving and never for entering. The story should give the sense of disorientation in places that I am seeing for the first time but also places that have left in my memory not a recollection but a void. Now the images try to reoccupy these voids but achieve nothing except to assume also the hue of dreams forgotten the instant they appear.

In sequence, there are a courtyard where carpets are hung out for beating (I am seeking in my memory recollections of a cradle in a sumptuous dwelling), a second courtyard cluttered with sacks of alfalfa (I try to awaken recollections of an estate in my early childhood), a third courtyard with the stables opening off it (was I born among the stalls?). It ought to be broad daylight and yet the shadow that envelops the story shows no sign of brightening, it does not transmit messages that the visual imagination can complete with sharply defined figures, it does not record spoken words but only confused voices, muffled songs.

It is in the third courtyard that the sensations begin to assume form. First the smells, the flavors, then the sight of a flame that illuminates the ageless faces of the Indians gathered in the vast kitchen of Anacleta Higueras, their smooth skin, which could be very old or adolescent: perhaps they were already old men in the time when my father was here, perhaps they are the children of his contemporaries, who now look at his son the way their fathers looked at him, as a stranger who arrived one morning with his horse and his gun.

Against the background of the black fireplace and the flames, the tall form of a woman is outlined, wrapped in a blanket with ocher and pink stripes. Anacleta Higueras is



* * *



preparing me a dish of spiced meatballs. "Eat, son, you've been traveling sixteen years finding your way home," she says, and I wonder whether "son" is the appellative an older woman always uses in addressing a youth or whether instead it means what the word means. And my lips are burning from the hot spices Anacleta has used to flavor her dish, as if that flavor should contain all flavors carried to their extreme, flavors I cannot distinguish or name, which now mingle on my palate like bursts of fire. I review all the flavors I have tasted in my life to try to recognize this multiple flavor, and I arrive at an opposite but perhaps equivalent sensation which is that of the milk for an infant, since as the first flavor it contains all flavor.

I look at Anacleta's face, the handsome Indian countenance which age has barely thickened without carving a single wrinkle on it; I look at the vast body wrapped in the blanket, and I wonder if it was to the high terrace of her now sloping bosom that I clung as a baby.

"You knew my father, then, Anacleta?"

"If only I had never known him, Nacho. It was not a good day, the day when he set foot in Oquedal...."

"Why not, Anacleta?"

"From him nothing but evil came to the Indian people ... and good did not come to the white people, either.. .. Then he disappeared.... But the day when he left Oquedal was not a good day, either....."

All the Indians have their eyes glued on me, eyes that, like those of children, look at an eternal present without forgiveness.

Amaranta is the daughter of Anacleta Higueras. Her eyes are slanting, broad, her nose fine and taut at the nostrils, lips thick in a curving line. I have eyes like hers, the same nose, identical lips. "Is it true that we look alike, Amaranta and I?" I ask Anacleta.

"All those born in Oquedal look alike. Indians and whites have faces that can be confused. We are in a vil-



* * *



lage of a few families, isolated in the mountains. For centuries we have married among ourselves."

"My father came from outside...."

"Yes. If we do not love foreigners we have our reasons."

The mouths of the Indians open in a slow sigh, mouths with few teeth and no gums, rotting and decrepit, skeletons' mouths.

There is a portrait I saw in passing through the second courtyard, the olive-colored photograph of a young man, surrounded by wreaths of flowers and illuminated by a little oil lamp. "The dead man in that portrait also looks like one of the family," I say to Anacleta.

"That is Faustino Higueras, may God keep him in the shining glory of His archangels!" Anacleta says, and a murmur of prayers rises from among the Indians.

"Was he your husband, Anacleta?" I ask.

"My brother he was, the sword and the shield of our house and of our people, until the enemy crossed his path...."

"We have the same eyes," I say to Amaranta, overtaking her among the sacks in the second courtyard.

"No, mine are bigger," she says.

"The only thing to do is to measure them." And I move my face to her face so that the arcs of our eyebrows meet; then, pressing one of my eyebrows against hers, I move my face so our temples and cheeks and cheekbones press together. "You see? The corners of our eyes end at the same point."

"I can't see anything," Amaranta says, but she doesn't move her face.

"And our noses," I say, putting my nose against hers, a bit sideways, trying to make our profiles coincide, "and our lips ..." I groan, mouth closed, because now our lips are also attached, or, rather, half of my mouth and half of hers.



* * *



"You're hurting me," Amaranta says as I press her whole body against the sacks and feel the tips of her budding breasts and the wriggle of her belly.

"Swine! Animal! This is why you've come to Oquedal! Your father's son, all right!" Anacleta's voice thunders in my ears, and her hands have seized me by the hair and slam me against the columns, as Amaranta, struck by a backhand slap, moans, flung on the sacks. "You're not touching this daughter of mine, and you will never touch her in your life!"

"Why never in my life? What could prevent us?" I protest. "I'm a man, and she's a woman.... If destiny decided we were to like each other, not today, someday, who knows? Why couldn't I ask her to be my wife?"

"Curse you!" Anacleta shouts. "It can't be! You can't even think of it: you understand?"

Is she my sister, then?—I ask myself. What keeps Anacleta from admitting she's my mother? And I say to her, "Why are you shouting so much, Anacleta? Is there perhaps some blood tie between us?"

"Blood?" Anacleta recovers herself; the edges of the blanket rise until her eyes are covered. "Your father came from far away.... What blood tie can he have with us?"

"But I was born in Oquedal ... of a woman from here...."

"Go and look elsewhere for your blood ties, not among us poor Indians.... Didn't your father tell you?"

"He never told me anything, I swear, Anacleta. I don't know who my mother is...."

Anacleta raises her hand and points toward the first courtyard. "Why wouldn't the mistress receive you? Why did she make you sleep down here with the servants? It was to her your father sent you, not to us. Go and present yourself to Dona Jazmina, say to her: I am Nacho Zamora y Alvarado, my father sent me to kneel at your feet."



* * *



Here the story should portray my spirit shaken as if by a hurricane at the revelation that the half of my name always hidden from me was that of the masters of Oquedal, and that estancias vast as provinces belonged to my family. Instead it is as if my journey backward in time merely coils me in a dark vortex where the successive courtyards of the Alvarado palace appear, one set in the other, equally familiar and alien to my deserted memory. The first thought that comes to my mind is the one I proclaim to Anacleta, grabbing her daughter by a braid. "Then I am your master, the master of your daughter, and I will take her when I please!"

"No!" Anacleta shouts. "Before you touch Amaranta I'll kill you!" And Amaranta draws away with a grimace that bares her teeth, whether in a moan or a smile I do not know.

The dining room of the Alvarados is dimly lighted by candlesticks encrusted with the wax of years, perhaps so that the peeling stucco decorations and the tattered lace of the hangings cannot be noted. I have been invited to supper by the mistress. Dona Jazmina's face is covered by a cake of powder that seems on the verge of coming loose and falling into the plate. She is also an Indian, under her hair, dyed a copper color and waved with a curling iron. Her heavy bracelets glitter at every spoonful. Jacinta, her daughter, was reared in a boarding school and wears a white tennis sweater but is like the Indian girls in her glances and movements.

"In this room at that time there were gaming tables," Dona Jazmina relates. "At this hour the games began and could even last all night. Some men lost whole estancias. Don Anastasio Zamora had settled here for the gambling, for no other reason. He always won, and the rumor had spread among us that he was a cheat."



* * *



"But he never won any estancia," I feel obliged to point out.

"Your father was the sort of man who, no matter what he had won during the night, had already lost it at dawn. And besides, with all his messes with women, it didn't take him long to go through what little he had left."

"Did he have affairs in this house, affairs with women... ?" I venture to ask her.

"There, down there, in the other courtyard, he went hunting for them, at night. .." Dona Jazmina says, pointing toward the Indians' quarters.

Jacinta bursts out laughing, hiding her mouth with her hands. I realize at this moment that she looks exactly like Amaranta, even if she is dressed and has her hair fixed in an entirely different fashion.

"Everybody resembles everybody else, in Oquedal," I say. "There is a portrait in the second courtyard that could be the portrait of all...."

They look at me, a bit upset. The mother says: "That was Faustino Higueras.... By blood he was only half Indian; the other half was white. In spirit, however, he was all Indian. He was with them, he took their side... and so he met his end."

"Was he white on his father's side, or his mother's?"

"You ask a lot of questions...."

"Are all the stories of Oquedal like this?" I say. "White men who go with Indian women... Indian men with white women..."

"Whites and Indians in Oquedal resemble one another. The blood has been mixed since the time of the Conquest. But masters should not go with servants. We can all do as we want, our class, with anyone of our own kind, but not with them... never.... Don Anastasio was born of a landowning family, even if he was poorer than a beggar. .. ?

"What does my father have to do with all of this?"



* * *



"Ask them to explain to you the song the Indians sing: After Zamora passes ... the score is even.... A baby in the cradle ... and a dead man in the grave ..."

"Did you hear what your mother said?" I say to Jacinta, as soon as we can talk by ourselves. "You and I can do anything we want."

"If we wanted. But we don't want."

"I might want to do something."

"What?"

"Bite you."

"As for that, I could gnaw you clean as a bone." And she bares her teeth.

In the room there is a bed with white sheets; it is not clear whether it is unmade or has been turned down for the night, shrouded in the thick mosquito net that hangs from a canopy. I thrust Jacinta among the folds of the gauze, and it is not clear whether she is resisting me or drawing me on; I try to pull up her clothes; she defends herself, ripping away my buckles and buttons.

"Oh, you have a mole there, too! Just like me! Look!"

At that moment a hailstorm of blows rains down on my head and shoulders, and Dona Jazmina is on us like a fury. "Let go of each other, for God's sake! Don't do it! You can't! Separate! You don't know what you're doing! You're a scoundrel, like your father!"

I pull myself together as best I can. "Why, Dona Jazmina? What do you mean? Who did my father do it with? With you?"

"Lout! Go to the servants! Out of our sight! With the servant women, like your father! Go back to your mother! Go on!"

"Who is my mother?"

"Anacleta Higueras, even if she doesn't want to admit it, since Faustino died."

* * *



* * *



The houses of Oquedal at night huddle against the earth, as if they felt pressing on them the weight of the moon, low and shrouded in unhealthy mists.

"What is this song they sing about my father, Anacleta?" I ask the woman standing motionless in a doorway like a statue in a niche of a church, "It mentions a dead man, a grave...."

Anacleta takes down the lantern. Together we cross the cornfields.

"In this field your father and Faustino Higueras had a quarrel," Anacleta explains, "and decided that the two of them were one too many for this world, and they dug a grave together. Once they had decided they had to fight to the death, it was as if the hatred between them were spent: and they worked in harmony, digging the ditch. Then they stood there, one on one side of the ditch, one on the other, each grasping a knife in his right hand, with the left wrapped in his poncho. And one of them, in turn, would leap over the grave and attack the other with blows of the knife, and the other would defend himself with the poncho and try to make his enemy fall into the grave. They fought like that till dawn, and no dust rose any more from the ground around the grave because it was so soaked with blood. All the Indians of Oquedal formed a circle around the empty grave and around the two young men, gasping and blood-stained, and they all were silent and motionless so as not to disturb the judgment of God, on whom the entire fate of them all depended, not just that of Faustino Higueras and Nacho Zamora."

"But... I am Nacho Zamora...."

"Your father, too, at that time was called Nacho."

"And who won, Anacleta?"

"How can you ask me that, boy? Zamora: no one can judge the ways of the Lord. Faustino was buried in this same earth. But for your father it was a bitter victory, since that same night he left and was never seen again at Oquedal."



* * *



"What are you telling me, Anacleta? This grave is empty!"

"In the days that followed, the Indians of the villages near and far came in procession to the grave of Faustino Higueras. They were setting off for the revolution, and they would ask me for relics to carry in a gold box at the head of their regiments in battle: a lock of hair, a scrap of the poncho, a clot of blood from a wound. But Faustino was not there, his grave was empty. From that day on many legends have been born: some say they have seen him at night running over the mountain on his coal-black horse, keeping watch over the sleeping Indians; some say he will not be seen again until the day when the Indians go down to the plain, and he will be riding at the head of the columns...."

Then it was Faustino! I saw him!—I want to say, but I am too overwhelmed to utter a word.

The Indians have silently approached with their torches and now form a circle around the open grave.

From their midst a young man with a thick neck comes forward, a tattered straw hat on his head. His features are similar to those of many here in Oquedal—I mean the slant of the eyes, the line of the nose, the curve of the lips that all resemble mine.

"What gave you the right, Nacho Zamora, to lay your hands on my sister?" he says, and a blade gleams in his right hand. His poncho is wrapped around his left forearm and one end of it trails to the ground.

A sound comes from the mouths of the Indians, which is not a murmur but rather a truncated sigh.

"Who are you?"

"I am Faustino Higueras. Defend yourself."

I stand beyond the grave, I wrap my poncho around my left arm, I grasp my knife.



* * *



[10]

You are taking tea with Arkadian Porphyrich, one of the most intellectually refined people in Ircania, who deservedly occupies the position of Director General of the State Police Archives. He is the person you have been ordered to contact first, the moment you arrive in Ircania on the mission assigned you by the Ataguitanian High Command. He has received you in the hospitable rooms of his office library, "the most complete and up-to-date in Ircania," as he told you at once, "where confiscated books are classified, catalogued, microfilmed, and preserved, whether they are printed works or mimeographed or typewritten or manuscript."

When the Ataguitanian authorities, who were holding you prisoner, promised you liberation provided you would agree to carry out a mission in a distant country ("official mission with secret aspects as well as secret mission with official aspects"), your first reaction was to refuse. Your scant inclination for government assignments, your lack of vocation for the profession of secret agent, and the obscure and tortuous way in which the duties you would have to fulfill were outlined, were sufficient reasons to make you prefer your cell in the model prison to the incognito of a journey in the boreal tundras of Ircania. But the thought that if you remained in their hands you could expect the worst, your curiosity about this assignment "which we believe may interest you, as a reader," the calculation that you could pretend to become involved and then foil their plan, persuaded you to accept.

Director General Arkadian Porphyrich, who seems perfectly aware of your situation, even its psychological aspects, speaks to you in an encouraging and didactic tone. "The first thing we must never lose sight of is this: the police are the great unifying power in a world other-



* * *



wise doomed to fall apart. It is natural that the police forces of different and even opposing regimes should recognize common interests on which to collaborate. In the field of the circulation of books...."

"Will they achieve a uniformity in censorship methods among the various regimes?" "Not uniformity. They will create a system in which the methods support and balance one another in turn...."

The Director General invites you to examine the planisphere hanging on the wall. The varied color scheme indicates: the countries where all books are systematically confiscated; the countries where only books published or approved by the State may circulate; the countries where existing censorship is crude, approximate, and unpredictable; the countries where the censorship is subtle, informed, sensitive to implications and allusions, managed by meticulous and sly intellectuals; the countries where there are two networks of dissemination: one legal and one clandestine; the countries where there is no censorship because there are no books, but there are many potential readers; the countries where there are no books and nobody

complains about their absence; the countries, finally, in which every day books are produced for all tastes and all ideas, amid general indifference. "Nobody these days holds the written word in such high esteem as police states do," Arkadian Porphyrich says. "What statistic allows one to identify the nations where literature enjoys true consideration better than the sums appropriated for controlling it and suppressing it? Where it is the object of such attentions, literature gains



* * *



an extraordinary authority, inconceivable in countries where it is allowed to vegetate as an innocuous pastime, without risks. To be sure, repression must also allow an occasional breathing space, must close an eye every now and then, alternate indulgence with abuse, with a certain unpredictability in its caprices; otherwise, if nothing more remains to be repressed, the whole system rusts and wears down. Let's be frank: every regime, even the most authoritarian, survives in a situation of unstable equilibrium, whereby it needs to justify constantly the existence of its repressive apparatus, therefore of something to repress. The wish to write things that irk the established authorities is one of the elements necessary to maintain this equilibrium. Therefore, by a secret treaty with the countries whose social regime is opposed to ours, we have created a common organization, with which you have intelligently agreed to collaborate, to export the books banned here and import the books banned there."

"This would seem to imply that the books banned here are allowed there, and vice versa...."

"Not on your life. The books banned here are super-banned there, and the books banned there are ultra-banned here. But from exporting to the adversary regime one's own banned books and from importing theirs, each regime derives at least two important advantages: it encourages the opponents of the hostile regime and it establishes a useful exchange of experience between the police services."

"The assignment I have been given," you hasten to explain, "is limited to contacts with officials of the Ircanian police, because it is only through your channels that the opponents' writings can come into our hands." (I am careful not to tell him that the objectives of my mission also include direct relations with the clandestine network of the opposition, and, as the situations require, I can favor one side against the other or vice versa. )



* * *



"Our archive is at your disposal," the Director General says. "I could show you some very rare manuscripts, the original drafts of works that reached the public only after having been sifted by four or five censorship committees and cut each time, modified, watered down, and finally published in a mutilated, edulcorated version, unrecognizable. For true reading one must come here, my dear sir."

"And do you read?"

"Do I read outside of my professional duties, you mean? Yes, I would say that every book, every document, every piece of evidence in this archive I read twice, two entirely different readings. The first, in haste, summarily, to know in which file I must keep the microfilm, under what heading it must be catalogued. Then, in the evening (I spend my evenings here, after the official office hours: the place is calm, relaxing, as you see), I stretch out on this sofa, I insert the film of some rare work in the reading machine, some secret dossier, and I enjoy the luxury of savoring it for my exclusive pleasure."

Arkadian Porphyrich crosses his legs in their boots, runs one finger between his neck and the collar of his uniform laden with decorations. He adds: "I don't know if you believe in the Spirit, sir. I believe in it. I believe in the dialogue that the Spirit conducts uninterruptedly with itself. And I feel that this dialogue is fulfilled as my gaze examines these forbidden pages. The Police is also Spirit, the State that I serve, the Censorship, like the texts on which our authority is exercised. The breath of the Spirit does not require a great audience to reveal itself; it flourishes in the shadow, in the obscure relationship perpetuated between the secrecy of the conspirators and the secrecy of the Police. To make it live, my reading, disinterested but always alert to every licit and illicit implication, is enough, in the glow of this lamp, in this great building with its deserted offices, the moment I can un-



* * *



button the tunic of my official's uniform and let myself be visited by the ghosts of the forbidden, which during daylight hours I must inflexibly keep at a distance....."

You have to admit that the Director General's words give you a feeling of comfort. If this man continues to harbor a desire and a curiosity for reading, it means that in the written paper in circulation there is still something not fabricated or manipulated by the omnipotent bureaucracies, that outside these offices an outside still exists....

"And what about the apocrypha conspiracy?" you ask, in a voice that tries to be coldly professional. "Are you informed about it?"

"Certainly. I have received a number of reports on the question. For a certain time we deceived ourselves, convinced we could keep everything under control. The secret services of the major powers went to great trouble to take over this organization, which seemed to have ramifications everywhere.... But the brains of the conspiracy, the Cagliostro of counterfeits, always eluded us.... Not that he was unknown to us: we had all his data in our files, he had long since been identified as an interfering swindler, a translator; but the true reasons for his activity remained obscure. He seemed to have no further relations with the various sects into which the conspiracy he had founded became divided, and yet he still exercised an indirect influence on their intrigues.... And when we managed to get our hands on him, we realized it was not easy to bend him to our will.... His driving motive was not money, or power, or ambition. It seems he did everything for a woman, to win her back, or perhaps only to get even, to win a bet with her. It was that woman we had to understand if we wanted to succeed in following the moves of our Cagliostro. But we have not been able to discover who she is. It is only through a deductive process that I have managed to learn many things about her, things I could not communicate in any official report: our direc-



* * *



tive bodies are not capable of grasping certain subtleties....

"For this woman," Arkadian Porphyrich continues, seeing how intently you are drinking in his words, "reading means stripping herself of every purpose, every foregone conclusion, to be ready to catch a voice that makes itself heard when you least expect it, a voice that comes from an unknown source, from somewhere beyond the book, beyond the author, beyond the conventions of writing: from the unsaid, from what the world has not yet said of itself and does not yet have the words to say. As for him, he wanted, on the contrary, to show her that behind the written page is the void: the world exists only as artifice, pretense, misunderstanding, falsehood. If this were all, we could easily give him the means to prove what he wanted; by we, I mean colleagues in the various countries and the various regimes, since there were many of us offering him our collaboration. And he didn't refuse it. On the contrary... But we could not manage to grasp whether he was joining in our game, or we were acting as pawns in his.... And what if it were simply a question of a madman? Only I could figure out his secret: I had him kidnapped by our agents, brought here, kept for a week in our solitary-confinement cells; then I interrogated him personally. His trouble was not madness, perhaps only desperation; the bet with the woman had long been lost; she was the winner, it was her always curious, always insatiable reading that managed to uncover truths hidden in the most barefaced fake, and falsity with no attenuating circumstances in words claiming to be the most truthful. What could our illusionist do? Rather than sever the last thread that tied him to her, he went on sowing confusion among titles, authors' names, pseudonyms, languages, translations, editions, jackets, title pages, chapters, beginnings, ends, so that she would be forced to recognize those signs of his presence, his greeting without hope



* * *



of an answer. 'I have understood my limitations,' he said to me. 'In reading, something happens over which I have no power.' I could have told him that this is the limit that even the most omnipotent police force cannot broach. We can prevent reading: but in the decree that forbids reading there will be still read something of the truth that we would wish never to be read...."

"And what became of him?" you ask with a concern perhaps no longer dictated by rivalry, but by solidarity and understanding.

"The man was finished; we could do what we liked with him: send him to forced labor or give him a routine job in our special service. Instead ..."

"Instead..."

"I allowed him to escape. A fake escape, a fake clandestine expatriation, and his trail was lost again. I believe I recognize his hand, every now and then, in material I happen to see.... His quality has improved.... Now he practices mystification for mystification's sake.... Our power now has no more effect on him. Luckily..."

"Luckily?"

"Something must always remain that eludes us.... For power to have an object on which to be exercised, a space in which to stretch out its arms... As long as I know there exists in the world someone who does tricks only for the love of the trick, as long as I know there is a woman who loves reading for reading's sake, I can convince myself that the world continues.... And every evening I, too, abandon myself to reading, like that distant unknown woman...."

Rapidly you wrest from your mind the inappropriate superimposition of the images of the Director General and Ludmilla, to enjoy the apotheosis of the Other Reader, radiant vision that rises from the disenchanted words of Arkadian Porphyrich, and you savor the certainty, con-



* * *



firmed by the omniscient Director, that between her and you there no longer exist obstacles or mysteries, whereas of the Cagliostro, your rival, only a pathetic shadow remains, more and more distant....

But your satisfaction cannot be complete until the spell of the interrupted readings is broken. Here, too, you try to broach the subject with Arkadian Porphyrich. "As a contribution to your collection, we would have liked to offer you one of the banned books most in demand in Ataguitania — Around an empty grave by Calixto Bandera—but in an excess of zeal, our police sent the entire printing to be pulped. We have been informed, however, that an Ircanian translation of this novel is circulating secretly in your country, in a clandestine, mimeographed edition. Do you know anything about it?"

Arkadian Porphyrich gets up to consult a file. "By Calixto Bandera, did you say? Here it is: at the moment it doesn't seem to be available. But if you will be so patient as to wait a week, or two at most, I have an exquisite surprise in store for you. Our informers report that one of our most important banned authors, Anatoly Anatolin, has been working for some time on a version of Bandera's novel in an Ircanian setting. From other sources we know that Anatolin is about to finish a new novel entitled What story down there awaits its end?, for whose confiscation we have already arranged a surprise police action, so as to prevent the work from entering underground circulation. As soon as we have seized it, I will have a copy prepared for you urgently, and you will be able to decide for yourself whether it is the book you are hunting for."

In a trice you hatch your plan. You have ways of getting in contact directly with Anatoly Anatolin; you must beat the agents of Arkadian Porphyrich to the draw, gain possession of the manuscript before them, save it from confiscation, carry it to safety, and carry yourself also to



* * *



safety, from both the Ircanian police and the Ataguitanian....

That night you have a dream. You are in a train, a long train, which is crossing Ircania. All the travelers are reading thick bound volumes, something that happens more easily in countries where newspapers and periodicals are not very attractive. You get the idea that some of the travelers, or all, are reading one of the novels you have had to break off, indeed, that all those novels are to be found there in the compartment, translated into a language unknown to you. You make an effort to read what is written on the spine of the bindings, though you know it is useless, because for you the writing is undecipherable.

One traveler steps into the passage and leaves his volume on his seat to show it is occupied; there is a bookmark in the pages. The moment he has gone out, you reach both hands for the book, you skim through it, you are convinced it is the one you seek. At that moment you realize that all the other travelers are looking at you, their eyes filled with menacing disapproval of your indiscreet behavior.

To conceal your embarrassment, you stand up and lean out of the window, still holding the volume in your hand. The train has stopped amid tracks and signal poles, perhaps at a switch point outside some remote station. There is fog and snow, nothing can be seen. On the next track another train has stopped, headed in the opposite direction, all its windows frosted. At the window opposite yours, the circular movement of a gloved hand restores to the pane some of its transparency: a woman's form emerges, in a cloud of furs. "Ludmilla..." you call her. "Ludmilla, the book..." you try to tell her, more with gestures than with your voice, "the book you're looking for... I've found it, it's here...." And you struggle to lower the window to pass it to her through the hard fringe of the ice that covers the train in a thick crust.



* * *



"The book I'm looking for," says the blurred figure, who holds out a volume similar to yours, "is the one that gives the sense of the world after the end of the world, the sense that the world is the end of everything that there is in the world, that the only thing there is in the world is the end of the world."

"That's not so!" you shout, and you hunt in the incomprehensible book for a sentence that can contradict Ludmilla's words. But the two trains depart, move off in opposite directions.

An icy wind sweeps the public gardens of the capital of Ircania. You are seated on a bench waiting for Anatoly Anatolin, who is to deliver to you the manuscript of his new novel, What story down there awaits its end? A young man with a long blond beard, a long black coat, and an oilcloth cap sits down beside you. "Act natural. The gardens are always under close observation."

A hedge protects you from alien eyes. A little bundle of pages passes from the inside pocket of Anatoly's long overcoat to the inside pocket of your short pea jacket. Anatoly Anatolin takes out more pages from the inside pocket of his jacket. "I had to divide the pages among my various pockets, so that the bulging wouldn't attract attention," he says, extracting a roll of pages from an inside pocket of his vest. The wind whips a page from his fingers; he rushes to retrieve it. He is about to produce another pack of pages from the rear pocket of his trousers, but two agents in civilian clothes spring from the hedge and arrest him.



* * *



What story down there awaits its end?

Walking along the great Prospect of our city, I mentally erase the elements I have decided not to take into consideration. I pass a ministry building, whose façade is laden with caryatids, columns, balustrades, plinths, brackets, metopes; and I feel the need to reduce it to a smooth vertical surface, a slab of opaque glass, a partition that defines space without imposing itself on one's sight. But even simplified like this, the building still oppresses me: I decide to do away with it completely; in its place a milky sky rises over the bare ground. Similarly, I erase five more ministries, three banks, and a couple of skyscraper headquarters of big companies. The world is so complicated, tangled, and overloaded that to see into it with any clarity you must prune and prune.

In the bustle of the Prospect I keep meeting people the sight of whom, for various reasons, is unpleasant to me: my superiors, because they remind me of my inferior position; my inferiors, because I hate to feel possessed of an authority I consider petty, as petty as the envy, servility, and bitterness it inspires. I erase both categories,



* * *



without any hesitation; out of the corner of my eye, I see them shrink and vanish in a faint wisp of fog.

In this operation I am careful to spare passersby, outsiders, strangers who have never bothered me; indeed, the faces of some of them, if I observe them objectively, seem worthy of sincere interest. But when a crowd of strangers is all that remains from the world surrounding me, I suddenly feel lonely and disoriented, so better to erase them as well, the whole lot, and forget it.

In a simplified world I have greater probabilities of meeting the few people I like to meet: Franziska, for example. Franziska is a friend, and when I run into her, I feel a great joy. We exchange witticisms, we laugh, we tell each other things, ordinary events but perhaps ones we do not tell other people, and when we discuss them together, they prove interesting to both of us, and before saying good-bye, we both insist we must meet again as soon as possible. Then months pass, until we run into each other in the street, by chance: festive cries, laughter, promises to get together again soon, but neither of us ever does anything to bring about a meeting; perhaps because we know that it would no longer be the same thing. In a reduced and simplified world, now that the air has been cleared of all those pre-established situations which would make the fact of my seeing Franziska more often suggest a relationship between us somehow requiring definition, perhaps eventual marriage, or, in any event, our being considered a couple, assuming a bond possibly extending to our respective families, to our forebears and descendants, to siblings and cousins, and a bond between the environment of our joint lives and our attachments in the sphere of incomes and possessions; now, having achieved the disappearance of these conditions which, all around us, silently, weighed on us and on our conversations, causing them never to last more than a few minutes, my meeting Franziska should be even more beautiful and



* * *



enjoyable. So it is natural for me to try to create the circumstances most favorable to a crossing of our paths, such as the abolition of all young women wearing a pale fur like the one she wore last time, so that if I see her from a distance, I can be sure it is she, without any risk of misunderstandings or disappointments, and then the abolition of all young men who look as if they might be friends of Franziska and might conceivably be about to meet her, maybe intentionally, and delay her in pleasant conversation just when I should be the one to meet her, by chance.

I have gone into details of a personal nature, but this should not lead anyone to believe that my abolitions are inspired primarily by my own immediate, private interests; on the contrary, I try to act in the interest of the whole (and hence also my own, but indirectly). True, to begin somewhere, I made all the public buildings that occurred within my range disappear, with their broad steps and columned entrances and their corridors and waiting rooms, and files and circulars and dossiers, but also with their division chiefs, their director-generals, their vice-inspectors, their acting heads, their permanent and temporary staff; but I did this because I believe their existence is damaging or superfluous to the harmony of the whole.

It is that time of day when droves of employees leave the overheated offices, button up their overcoats with their fake-fur collars, and pile into buses. I blink, and they have vanished: only some scattered passersby can be discerned, far off, in the deserted streets from which I have also scrupulously eliminated automobiles and trucks and buses. I like to see the surface of the street bare and smooth as a bowling alley.

Then I abolish barracks, guard houses, police stations: all people in uniform vanish as if they had never existed. Perhaps I've let things get out of hand; I realize that firemen have suffered the same fate, and postmen, municipal



* * *



streetcleaners, and other categories that might deservedly have hoped for a different treatment; but what's done is done: no use splitting hairs. To avoid trouble, I quickly abolish fires, garbage, and also mail, which after all never brings anything but problems.

I check to make sure that hospitals, clinics, rest homes have not been left standing: to erase doctors, nurses, patients seems to me the only possible health. Then courts, with their complement of magistrates, lawyers, defendants and injured parties; prisons, with prisoners and guards inside. Then I erase the university with the entire faculty, the academy of sciences, letters, and arts, the museum, the library, monuments and curators, theaters, movies, televisions, newspapers. If they think respect for culture is going to stop me, they're wrong.

Then come the economic structures, which for too long a time have continued to enforce their outrageous claim to decide our lives. What do they think they are? One by one, I dissolve all shops, beginning with the ones selling prime necessities and ending with those selling superfluities, luxuries: first I clear the display windows of goods, then I erase the counters, shelves, salesgirls, cashiers, floorwalkers. The crowd of customers is momentarily bewildered, hands extended into the void, as shopping carts evaporate; then the customers themselves are also swallowed up by the vacuum. From consumer I work back to producer: I abolish all industry, light and heavy, I wipe out raw materials and sources of energy. What about agriculture? Away with that, too! And to keep anyone from saying I want to regress toward primitive societies, I also eliminate hunting and fishing.

Nature... Aha! Don't think I haven't caught on. This nature business is another fine fraud: kill it! A layer of the earth's crust is all that has to remain, solid enough underfoot, and everywhere else, nothingness.

I continue my walk along the Prospect, which now can-



* * *



not be distinguished from the endless plain, deserted and frozen. There are no more walls as far as the eye can see, no mountains or hills; not a river or a lake or a sea: only a flat, gray expanse of ice, as compact as basalt. Renouncing things is less difficult than people believe: it's all a matter of getting started. Once you've succeeded in dispensing with something you thought essential, you realize you can also do without something else, then without many other things. So here I am walking along this empty surface that is the world. There is a wind grazing the ground, dragging with flurries of fine snow the last residue of the vanished world: a bunch of ripe grapes which seems just picked from the vine, an infant's woolen bootee, a well-oiled hinge, a page that seems torn from a novel written in Spanish, with a woman's name: Amaranta. Was it a few seconds ago that everything ceased to exist, or many centuries? I've already lost any sense of time.

There, at the end of that strip of nothing I continue to call the Prospect, I see a slender form advancing, in a pale fur jacket: it's Franziska! I recognize her stride in her high boots, and the way she keeps her arms hidden in her muff, and the long striped scarf flapping after her. The cold air and the cleared terrain guarantee good visibility, but I wave my arms in vain, trying to attract her attention: she can't recognize me, we're still too far apart. I advance, hastening my steps; at least I think I'm advancing, but I lack any reference points. Now, on the line between me and Franziska, some shadows can be discerned: they are men, men in overcoats and hats. They are waiting for me. Who can they be?

When I have come close enough, I recognize them: they're the men from Section D. How is it they've remained here? What are they doing? I thought I had abolished them, too, when I erased the personnel of all the offices. Why have they placed themselves between me and Franziska? "Now I'll erase them!" I decide, and concentrate. Nothing doing: they're still there between us.



* * *



"Well, here you are," they greet me. "Still one of us, are you? Good for you! You gave us a real hand, all right, and now everything is clean."

"What?" I exclaim. "Were you erasing as well?"

Now I can understand my sensation that, this time, I had ventured further than in my previous exercises of making the world around me disappear.

"But tell me something: weren't you the ones who were always talking of increment, of implementing, of expansion ... ?"

"Well? There's no contradiction.... Everything is contemplated in the logic of projections..... The line of development starts again from zero.... You had also realized that the situation had come to a dead end... was deteriorating. . . The only thing was to help the process along.... Tendentially, something that might seem negative in the short run, in the long run can prove an incentive...."

"But I didn't mean it the way you did.... I had something else in mind.... I erase in a different way ..." I protest, and I think: If they believe they can fit me into their plans, they're wrong!

I can't wait to go into reverse, to make the things of the world exist again, one by one or all together, to set their variegated and tangible substance, like a compact wall, against the men's plans of general vacancy. I close my eyes and reopen them, sure of finding myself on the Prospect again, teeming with traffic, the street lamps lighted at this hour, and the final edition of the papers in the kiosks. But instead: nothing. The void all around us is more and more void, Franziska's form on the horizon comes forward slowly, as if she had to climb the curve of the earth's globe. Are we the only survivors? With mounting terror I begin to realize the truth: the world I believed erased by a decision of my mind that I could revoke at any moment is truly finished.

"You have to be realistic," the officials of Section D are



* * *



saying. "Just take a look around. The whole universe is ... let's say it's in a transitional phase...." And they point to the sky, where the constellations have become unrecognizable, here clotted, there rarefied, the celestial map in upheaval, stars exploding one after the other, while more stars emit a final flicker and die. "The important thing is that now, when the new ones arrive, they must find Section D in perfect working order, its cadres complete, its functional structures in operation...."

"But who are the new ones? What do they do? What do they want?" I ask, and on the frozen surface that separates me from Franziska I see a fine crack, spreading like a mysterious trap.

"It's too early to say. For us to say it in our terms. At present we can't even see them. But we can be sure they're there, and for that matter, we had been informed, even before, that they were about to arrive.... But we're here, too, and they can't help knowing it, we who represent the only possible continuity with what there was before.... They need us. They have to turn to us, entrust to us the practical management of what remains.... The world will begin again the way we want it...."

No, I think, the world that I would like to begin existing again around me and Franziska can't be yours; I would like to concentrate and think of a place in every detail, a setting where I would like to be with Franziska at this moment; for example, a café lined with mirrors, which reflect crystal chandeliers, and there is an orchestra playing waltzes and the strains of the violins flutter over the little marble tables and the steaming cups and the pastries with whipped cream. While outside, beyond the frosted windows, the world full of people and of things would make its presence felt: the presence of the world, friendly and hostile, things to rejoice in or to combat.... I think this with all my strength, but by now I know my



* * *



strength isn't enough to make it exist: nothingness is stronger and has occupied the whole earth.

"To work out a relationship with them won't be easy," the Section D men continue, "and we'll have to be on our toes, not make mistakes, not allow them to cut us out. We had you in mind, to win the new ones' confidence. You've proved your ability in the liquidation phase, and of all of us you're the least compromised with the old administration. You'll have to introduce yourself, explain what the Section is, how they can use it, for urgent, indispensable jobs.... Well, you'll figure out the way to make things look best...."

"I should be going, then. I'll go look for them...." I hasten to say, because I realize that if I don't make my escape now, if I don't reach Franziska immediately and save her, in a minute it will be too late; the trap is about to be sprung. I run off before the Section D men can hold me, ask me questions, give me instructions. I advance over the frozen crust toward her. The world is reduced to a sheet of paper on which nothing can be written except abstract words, as if all concrete nouns were finished; if one could only succeed in writing the word "chair," then it would be possible to write also "spoon," "gravy," "stove," but the stylistic formula of the text prohibits it.

On the ground that separates me from Franziska I see some fissures open, some furrows, crevasses; at each moment one of my feet is about to be caught in a pitfall: these interstices widen, soon a chasm will yawn between me and Franziska, an abyss! I leap from one side to the other, and below I see no bottom, only nothingness which continues down to infinity; I run across pieces of world scattered in the void; the world is crumbling.... The men from Section D call me, they motion desperately for me to come back, not to risk going any farther..... Franziska! One more leap and I'll be with you!

She is here, she is opposite me, smiling, with that



* * *



golden sparkle in her eyes, her small face a bit chapped from the cold. "Oh! It's really you! Every time I walk on the Prospect I run into you! Now, don't tell me you spend all your days out strolling! Listen: I know a café here at the corner, all lined with mirrors, and there's an orchestra that plays waltzes. Will you invite me there?"



* * *



[11]

Reader, it is time for your tempest-tossed vessel to come to port. What harbor can receive you more securely than a great library? Certainly there is one in the city from which you set out and to which you have returned after circling the world from book to book. You have one hope left, that the ten novels that evaporated in your hands the moment you began reading them can be found in this library.

Finally a free, calm day opens before you; you go to the library, consult the catalogue; you can hardly repress a cry of rejoicing, or, rather, ten cries; all the authors and the titles you are looking for appear in the catalogue, duly recorded.

You compile a first request form and hand it in; you are told that there must be an error of numbering in the catalogue; the book cannot be found; in any case, they will investigate. You immediately request another; they tell you it is out on loan, but they are unable to determine who took it out and when. The third you ask for is at the bindery; it will be back in a month. The fourth is kept in a wing of the library now closed for repairs. You keep filling out forms; for one reason or another, none of the books you ask for is available.

While the staff continues searching, you wait patiently, seated at a table along with other, more fortunate, readers, immersed in their volumes. You crane your neck to left and right, to peek at the others' books. Who knows? One of these people may be reading one of the books you are looking for.

The gaze of the reader opposite you, instead of resting on the book open in his hands, wanders in the air. But his eyes are not absent: a fixed intensity accompanies the



* * *



movements of the blue irises. Every now and then your eyes meet. At a certain point he addresses you, or, rather, he speaks as if into the void, though certainly to you:

"Don't be amazed if you see my eyes always wandering. In fact, this is my way of reading, and it is only in this way that reading proves fruitful for me. If a book truly interests me, I cannot follow it for more than a few lines before my mind, having seized on a thought that the text suggests to it, or a feeling, or a question, or an image, goes off on a tangent and springs from thought to thought, from image to image, in an itinerary of reasonings and fantasies that I feel the need to pursue to the end, moving away from the book until I have lost sight of it. The stimulus of reading is indispensable to me, and of meaty reading, even if, of every book, I manage to read no more than a few pages. But those few pages already enclose for me whole universes, which I can never exhaust."

"I understand you perfectly," another reader interjects, raising his waxen face and reddened eyes from his volume. "Reading is a discontinuous and fragmentary operation. Or, rather, the object of reading is a punctiform and pulviscular material. In the spreading expanse of the writing, the reader's attention isolates some minimal segments, juxtapositions of words, metaphors, syntactic nexuses, logical passages, lexical peculiarities that prove to possess an extremely concentrated density of meaning. They are like elemental particles making up the work's nucleus, around which all the rest revolves. Or else like the void at the bottom of a vortex which sucks in and swallows currents. It is through these apertures that, in barely perceptible flashes, the truth the book may bear is revealed, its ultimate substance. Myths and mysteries consist of impalpable little granules, like the pollen that sticks to the butterfly's legs; only those who have realized this can expect revelations and illuminations. This is why my attention, in contrast to what you, sir, were saying,



* * *



cannot be detached from the written lines even for an instant. I must not be distracted if I do not wish to miss some valuable clue. Every time I come upon one of these clumps of meaning I must go on digging around to see if the nugget extends into a vein. This is why my reading has no end: I read and reread, each urne seeking the confirmation of a new discovery among the folds of the sentences."

"I, too, feel the need to reread the books I have already read," a third reader says, "but at every rereading I seem to be reading a new book, for the first time. Is it I who keep changing and seeing new things of which I was not previously aware? Or is reading a construction that assumes form, assembling a great number of variables, and therefore something that cannot be repeated twice according to the same pattern? Every time I seek to relive the emotion of a previous reading, I experience different and unexpected impressions, and do not find again those of before. At certain moments it seems to me that between one reading and the next there is a progression: in the sense, for example, of penetrating further into the spirit of the text, or of increasing my critical detachment. At other moments, on the contrary, I seem to retain the memory of the readings of a single book one next to another, enthusiastic or cold or hostile, scattered in time without a perspective, without a thread that ties them together. The conclusion I have reached is that reading is an operation without object; or that its true object is itself. The book is an accessory aid, or even a pretext."

A fourth speaks up: "If you mean to insist on the subjectivity of reading, then I agree with you, but not in the centrifugal sense you attribute to it. Every new book I read comes to be a part of that overall and unitary book that is the sum of my readings. This does not come about without some effort: to compose that general book, each individual book must be transformed, enter into a rela-



* * *



tionship with the books I have read previously, become their corollary or development or confutation or gloss or reference text. For years I have been coming to this library, and I explore it volume by volume, shelf by shelf, but I could demonstrate to you that I have done nothing but continue the reading of a single book."

"In my case, too, all the books I read are leading to a single book," a fifth reader says, sticking his face out from behind a pile of bound volumes, "but it is a book remote in time, which barely surfaces from my memories. There is a story that for me comes before all other stories and of which all the stories I read seem to carry an echo, immediately lost. In my readings I do nothing but seek that book read in my childhood, but what I remember of it is too little to enable me to find it again."

A sixth reader, who was standing, examining the shelves with his nose in the air, approaches the table. "The moment that counts most for me is the one that precedes reading. At times a title is enough to kindle in me the desire for a book that perhaps does not exist. At times it is the incipit of the book, the first sentences.... In other words: if you need little to set the imagination going, I require even less: the promise of reading is enough."

"For me, on the other hand, it is the end that counts," a seventh says, "but the true end, final, concealed in the darkness, the goal to which the book wants to carry you. I also seek openings in reading," he says, nodding toward the man with the bleary eyes, "but my gaze digs between the words to try to discern what is outlined in the distance, in the spaces that extend beyond the words 'the end.' "

The moment has come for you to speak. "Gentlemen, first I must say that in books I like to read only what is written, and to connect the details with the whole, and to consider certain readings as definitive; and I like to keep one book distinct from the other, each for what it has that



* * *



is different and new; and I especially like books to be read from beginning to end. For a while now, everything has been going wrong for me: it seems to me that in the world there now exist only stories that remain suspended or get lost along the way."

The fifth reader answers you: "That story of which I spoke—I, too, remember the beginning well, but I have forgotten all the rest. It must be a story of the Arabian Nights. I am collating the various editions, the translations in all languages. Similar stories are numerous and there are many variants, but none is that story. Can I have dreamed it? And yet I know I will have no peace until I have found it and find out how it ends."

"The Caliph Harun-al-Rashid"—this is the beginning of the story that, seeing your curiosity, he agrees to tell— "one night, in the grip of insomnia, disguises himself as a merchant and goes out into the streets of Baghdad. A boat carries him along the waters of the Tigris to the gate of a garden. At the edge of a pool a maiden beautiful as the moon is singing, accompanying herself on the lute. A slave girl admits Harun to the palace and makes him put on a saffron-colored cloak. The maiden who was singing in the garden is seated on a silver chair. On cushions around her are seated seven men wrapped in saffron-colored cloaks. 'Only you were missing,' the maiden says, 'you are late'; and she invites him to sit on a cushion at her side. 'Noble sirs, you have sworn to obey me blindly, and now the moment has come to put you to the test.' And from around her throat the maiden takes a pearl necklace. This necklace has seven white pearls and one black pearl. Now I will break its string and drop the pearls into an onyx cup. He who draws, by lot, the black pearl must kill the Caliph Harun-al-Rashid and bring me his head. As a reward I will give myself to him. But if he should refuse to kill the Caliph, he will be killed by the other seven, who will repeat the drawing of lots for the black pearl.' With a



* * *



shudder Harun-al-Rashid opens his hand, sees the black pearl, and speaks to the maiden. 'I will obey the command of fate and yours, on condition that you tell me what offense of the Caliph has provoked your hatred,' he asks, anxious to hear the story."

This relic of some childish reading should also be included in your list of interrupted books. But what title does it have?

"If it had a title I have forgotten that, too. Give it one yourself."

The words with which the story breaks off seem to you to express well the spirit of the Arabian Nights. You write, then, He asks, anxious to hear the story in the list of titles you have asked for in vain at the library.

"May I see?" the sixth reader asks, taking the list of titles. He removes his nearsighted glasses, puts them in their case, opens another case, takes out his farsighted glasses, and reads aloud:

"If on a winter's night a traveler, outside the town of Malbork, leaning from the steep slope without fear of wind or vertigo, looks down in the gathering shadow in a network of lines that enlace, in a network of lines that intersect, on the carpet of leaves illuminated by the moon around an empty grave— What story down there awaits its end?—he asks, anxious to hear the story."

He pushes his eyeglasses up on his brow. "Yes, a novel that begins like that. . ." he says, "I could swear I've read it.... You have only this beginning and would like to find the continuation, is that true? The trouble is that once upon a time they all began like that, all novels. There was somebody who went along a lonely street and saw something that attracted his attention, something that seemed to conceal a mystery, or a premonition; then he asked for explanations and they told him a long story...."

"But, look here, there's a misunderstanding," you try to warn him. "This isn't a book... these are only titles ... the Traveler..."



* * *



"Oh, the traveler always appeared only in the first pages and then was never mentioned again—he had fulfilled his function, the novel wasn't his story...."

"But this isn't the story whose continuation I want to know...."

The seventh reader interrupts you: "Do you believe that every story must have a beginning and an end? In ancient times a story could end only in two ways: having passed all the tests, the hero and the heroine married, or else they died. The ultimate meaning to which all stories refer has two faces: the continuity of life, the inevitability of death."

You stop for a moment to reflect on these words. Then, in a flash, you decide you want to marry Ludmilla.



* * *



[12]

Now you are man and wife, Reader and Reader. A great double bed receives your parallel readings.

Ludmilla closes her book, turns off her light, puts her head back against the pillow, and says, "Turn off your light, too. Aren't you tired of reading?"

And you say, "Just a moment, I've almost finished If on a winter's night a traveler by Italo Calvino."




